


 PREFACE
Constitution is a living document, an instrument which makes thegovernment system work. Its flexibility lies in its amendments. In this edition,
the text of the Constitution of India has been brought up-to-date by
incorporating therein all amendments made by Parliament up to and including
the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006. The footnotes below
the text indicate the Constitution Amendment Acts by which such amendments
have been made.The Constitution applies to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with certainexceptions and modifications as provided in article 370 and the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954. This Order has been

included in Appendix I for facility of reference. Appendix II contains a
re-statement of the exceptions and modifications.The text of the constitutional amendments relating to the Constitution(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, the Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2002 and the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act,
2003, which have not yet come into force, have been provided in the text at
the appropriate places wherever or otherwise in the footnote.NEW DELHI;DR. K.N. CHATURVEDI,
1st December 
2007.Secretary to the Government of India


  


 APPENDIX I 1THE CONSTITUTION (APPLICATION TO JAMMU
AND KASHMIR) ORDER, 1954C.O. 48In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 370 of theConstitution, the President, with the concurrence of the Government of the
State of Jammu and Kashmir, is pleased to make the following Order:Š
1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Application to Jammuand Kashmir) Order, 1954.
(2) It shall come into force on the fourteenth day of May, 1954, and shall
thereupon supersede the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir)
Order, 1950.
2. 2[The provisions of the Constitution as in force on the 20th day of June,1964 and as amended by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) Act,
1966, the Constitution (Twenty-first Amendment) Act, 1967, section 5 of the

Constitution (Twenty-third 
Amendment) Act, 1969, the Constitution (Twenty-
fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, section 2 
of the Constitution (Twenty-fifth
Amendment) Act, 1971, 
the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971,
the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, section 2 of the Constitution(Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, section 2 of the Constitution (Thirty-thirdAmendment) Act, 1974, sections 2, 5, 6 and 7 of the Constitution (Thirty-
eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment)
Act, 1975, the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, sections 2, 3 and
6 of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 and the Constitution
(Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988 which, in addition to article 1 and article370, shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and theexceptions and modifications subject to which they shall so apply shall be as
follows:Š](1) THE PREAMBLE.
(2) PART I.

To article 3, there shall be added the following further proviso, namely:Š
ﬁProvided further that no Bill providing for increasing or diminishingthe area of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or altering the name or3571Published with the Ministry of Law Notification No. S.R.O. 1610, dated the 14th May,
1954, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, section 3, page 821.
2The opening words have been successively amended by C.O. 56, C.O. 74, C.O.76,C.O.79, C.O. 89, C.O.91, C.O.94, C.O.98, C.O.103, C.O.104, C.O.105, C.O.108, C.O.136
and C.O. 141 to read as above. 


 boundary of that State shall be introduced in Parliament without the
consent of the Legislature of that State.ﬂ.(3) PART II.
(a) This Part shall be deemed to have been applicable in relation tothe State of Jammu and Kashmir as from the 26th day of January, 1950.
(b) To article 7, there shall be added the following further proviso,
namely:ŠﬁProvided further that nothing in this article shall apply to apermanent resident of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, who, after

having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, returns
to the territory of that State under a permit for resettlement in that
State or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any
law made by the Legislature of that State, and every such personshall be deemed to be a citizen of India.ﬂ. (4) PART III.
(a) In article 13, references to the commencement of the Constitutionshall be construed as references to the commencement of this Order.
1*        *                 
     *                      *                     *
(c) In clause (3) of article 16, the reference to the State shall beconstrued as not including a reference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(d) In article 19, for a period of 2[3[twenty-five] years] from thecommencement of this Order:Š(i) in clauses (3) and (4), after the words ﬁin the interests ofﬂ, thewords ﬁthe security of the State orﬂ shall be inserted;(ii) in clause (5), for the words ﬁor for the protection of the interestsof any Scheduled Tribesﬂ, the words ﬁor in the interests of the

security of the Stateﬂ shall be substituted; and(iii) the following new clause shall be added, namely:Š‚(7) The words ﬁreasonable restrictionsﬂ occurring in clauses(2), (3), (4) and (5) shall be construed as meaning such restrictionsas the appropriate Legislature deems reasonable.™.
1Cl. (b) omitted by C.O. 124.2Subs. by C.O. 69, for ﬁten yearsﬂ.3Subs. by C.O. 97, for ﬁtwentyﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)358 


 (e) In clauses (4) and (7) of article 22, for the word ﬁParliamentﬂ, thewords ﬁthe Legislature of the Stateﬂ shall be substituted.(f) In article 31, clauses (3), (4) and (6) shall be omitted; and for clause(5), there shall be substituted the following clause, namely:Šﬁ(5) Nothing in clause (2) shall affectŠ(a) the provisions of any existing law; or(b) the provisions of any law which the State may hereafter makeŠ(i) for the purpose of imposing or levying any tax or penalty;or(ii) for the promotion of public health or the prevention ofdanger to life or property; or(iii) with respect to property declared by law to be evacueeproperty.ﬂ.
(g) In article 31A, the proviso to clause (1) shall be omitted; and for sub-clause (a) of clause (2), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:Š‚(a) ﬁestateﬂ shall mean land which is occupied or has been let foragricultural purposes or for purposes subservient to agriculture, or for

pasture, and includesŠ(i) sites of buildings and other structures on such land;(ii) trees standing on such land;(iii) forest land and wooded waste;(iv) area covered by or fields floating over water;(v) sites of jandars and 
gharats;(vi) any jagir, inam, muafi
 or 
mukarrari or other similar grant, but
does not includeŠ(i) the site of any building in any town, or town area or villageabadi or any land appurtenant to any such building or site;
(ii) any land which is occupied as the site of a town or village;orTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)359 


 (iii) any land reserved for building purposes in amunicipality or notified area or cantonment or town area or any
area for which a town planning scheme is sanctioned.™.1[(h) In article 32, clause (3) shall be omitted.](i) In article 35Š(i) references to the commencement of the Constitution shall beconstrued as references to the commencement of this Order;(ii) in clause (a) (i), the words, brackets and figures ﬁclause (3) ofarticle 16, clause (3) of article 32ﬂ shall be omitted; and(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be added, namely:Šﬁ(c) no law with respect to preventive detention made by theLegislature of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, whether before or

after the commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu
and Kashmir) Order, 1954, shall be void on the ground that it is

inconsistent with any of the provisions of this part, but any such
law shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, cease to have effect on

the expiration of 2[3[twenty-five] years] from the commencement ofthe said Order, except as respects things done or omitted to be done

before the expiration thereof.ﬂ.(j) After article 35, the following new article shall be added, namely:Šﬁ35A. Saving of laws with respect to permanent residents and their rights.ŠNotwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, no existing
law in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and no law hereafter

enacted by the Legislature of the State,Š(a) defining the classes of persons who are, or shall be, permanentresidents of the State of Jammu and Kashmir; or(b) conferring on such permanent residents any special rightsand privileges or imposing upon other persons any restrictions
as respectsŠ(i) employment under the State Government;1Subs. by C.O. 89, for cl. (h).2Subs. by C.O. 69, for ﬁten yearsﬂ.3Subs. by C.O. 97, for ﬁtwentyﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)360 


 (ii) acquisition of immovable property in the State;(iii) settlement in the State; or(iv) right to scholarships and such other forms of aid as the StateGovernment may provide,shall be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away orabridges any rights conferred on the other citizens of India by any
provision of this Part.ﬂ.(5) PART V.
1[(a) For the purposes of article 55, the population of the State of Jammuand Kashmir shall be deemed to be sixty-three lakhs.(b) In article 81, for clauses (2) and (3), the following clauses shall besubstituted, namely:Š
ﬁ(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),Š(a) there shall be allotted to the State six seats in the House of thePeople;(b) the State shall be divided into single member territorialconstituencies by the Delimitation Commission constituted under

the Delimitation Act, 1972, in accordance with such procedure as
the Commission may deem fit;(c) the constituencies shall, as far as practicable, begeographically compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall
be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative
units, facilities of communication and public convenience; and(d) the constituencies into which the State is divided shall notcomprise the area under the occupation of Pakistan.(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall affect the representation of the State inthe House of the People until the dissolution of the House existing on
the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the final order or orders
of the Delimitation Commission relating to the delimitation of

parliamentary constituencies under the Delimitation Act, 1972.1Subs. by C.O. 98, for cls. (a) and (b).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)361 


 (4) (a) The Delimitation Commission shall associate with itself forthepurpose of assisting it in its duties in respect of the State, five persons

who shall be members of the House of the People representing the State.(b) The persons to be so associated from the State shall be nominatedby the Speaker of the House of the People having due regard to the
composition of the House.(c) The first nominations to be made under sub-clause (b) shall bemade by the Speaker of the House of the People within two months from
the commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Second Amendment Order, 1974.
(d) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or tosign any decision of the Delimitation Commission.(e) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate memberfalls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the Speaker

of the House of the People and in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clauses (a) and (b).ﬂ]. 1[(c) In article 133, after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted,namely:Š‚(1A) The provisions of section 3 of the Constitution (ThirtiethAmendment) Act, 1972, shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir subject to the modification that references therein to ﬁthis Actﬂ,
ﬁthe commencement of this Actﬂ, ﬁthis Act had not been passedﬂ and
ﬁas amended by this Actﬂ shall be construed respectively as references
to ﬁthe Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Second
Amendment Order, 1974ﬂ, ﬁthe commencement 
of the said Orderﬂ, ﬁthe
said Order had not been madeﬂ and ﬁas it stands after the commencement
of the said Order™™.™].
2[(d)] In article 134, clause (2), after the words ﬁParliament mayﬂ, thewords ﬁon the request of the Legislature of the Stateﬂ shall be inserted.2[(e)] Articles 135, 3*** and 139 shall be omitted.4*                    *                    *                    *                    *
1Ins. by C.O. 98.
2Cls. (c) and (d) relettered as cls. (d) and (e), ibid.3The figures ﬁ136ﬂ omitted by C.O. 60.4Cls. (
f) and (g) omitted by C.O. 56.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)362 


 1[(5A) PART VI.
2[(a) Articles 153 to 217, article 219, article 221, articles 223, 224,224A and 225 and articles 227 to 237 shall be omitted.](b) In article 220, references to the commencement of the Constitutionshall be construed as references to the commencement of the Constitution(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Amendment Order, 1960.
3[(c) In article 222, after clause (1), the following new clause shall beinserted, namely:Šﬁ(1A) Every such transfer from the High Court of Jammu and Kashmiror to that High Court shall be made after consultation with the Governor.ﬂ.]]
(6) PART XI.
4[(a) In article 246, for the words, brackets and figures ﬁclauses (2) and (3)ﬂoccurring in clause (1), the word, brackets and figure ﬁclause (2)ﬂ shall besubstituted, and the words, brackets and figure ﬁNotwithstanding anything inclause (3),ﬂ occurring in clause (2) and the whole of clauses (3) and (4) shall be
omitted.]5[6[(b) For article 248, the following article shall be substituted, namely:Šﬁ248. Residuary powers of legislation.ŠParliament has exclusivepower to make any law with respect toŠ7[(a) prevention of activities involving terrorist acts directedtowards overawing the Government as by law established or strikingterror in the people or any section of the people or alienating anysection of the people or adversely affecting the harmony amongst
different sections of the people;]8[(aa)]9[prevention of other activities] directed towardsdisclaiming, questioning or 
disrupting the sovereignty and territorial1Ins. by C.O. 60 (w.e.f. 26-1-1960).
2Subs. by C.O. 89, for cl. (a).3Subs. by C.O. 74, for cl. (c) (w.e.f. 24-11-1965).
4Subs. by C.O. 66, for cl. (a).5Cls. (b) and (bb) subs. by C.O. 85, for original cl. (b).6Subs. by C.O. 93, for cl. (b).7Ins. by C.O. 122.8Cl. (a) relettered as cl. (aa), ibid.9Subs., ibid., for ﬁprevention of activitiesﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)363 


 integrity of India or bringing about cession of a part of the territory
of India or secession of a part of the territory of India from the Unionor causing insult to the Indian National Flag, the Indian National
Anthem and this Constitution; and(b) taxes onŠ(i) foreign travel by sea or air;(ii) inland air travel;(iii)  postal articles, including money orders, phonograms and
telegrams.ﬂ.1[Explanation.ŠIn this article, ﬁterrorist actﬂ means any act or thingby using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammablesubstances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious
gases or other chemicals or any other substances (whether biological or
otherwise) of a hazardous nature.]2[(bb) In article 249, in clause (1), for the words ﬁany matter enumeratedin the State List specified in the resolutionﬂ, the words ﬁany matter specified
in the resolution, being a matter which is not enumerated in the Union List
or in the Concurrent Listﬂ shall be substituted.]](c) In article 250, for the words ﬁto any of the matters enumerated in theState Listﬂ, the words ﬁalso to matters not enumerated in the Union Listﬂ

shall be substituted.3**         *          *          *
(e) To article 253, the following proviso shall be added, namely:Š
ﬁProvided that after the commencement of the Constitution(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954, no decision affecting
the disposition of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be made by the
Government of India without the consent of the Government of that
State.ﬂ.4**         *          *          *
5[(f)] Article 255 shall be omitted.
5[(g)] Article 256 shall be re-numbered as clause (1) of that article, and thefollowing new clause shall be added thereto, namely:Š1Ins. by C.O. 122.2Subs. by C.O. 129, for cl. (bb).3Cl. (d) omitted, ibid.4Cl. (f) omitted by C.O. 66.5Cls. (g) and (h) relettered as cls. (f) and (g), ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)364 


 ﬁ(2) The State of Jammu and Kashmir shall so execise its executivepower as to facilitate the discharge by the Union of its duties andresponsibilities under the Constitution in relation to that State; and in
particular, the said State shall, if so required by the Union, acquire or

requisition property on behalf and at the expense of the Union, or if the
property belongs to the State, transfer it to the Union on such terms as
may be agreed, or in default of agreement, as may be determined by anarbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India.ﬂ.1* *         *          **
2[(h)] In clause (2) of article 261, the words ﬁmade by Parliamentﬂ shallbe omitted.(7) PART XII.
3* *         *          **
4[(a)] Clause (2) of article 267, article 273, clause (2) of article 283 5[andarticle 290] shall be omitted.4[(b)] In articles 266, 282, 284, 298, 299 and 300, references to the State orStates shall be construed as not including references to the State of Jammuand Kashmir.
4[(c)] In articles 277 and 295, references to the commencement of theConstitution shall be construed as references to the commencement of this
order.
(8) PART XIII.
6*** In clause (1) of article 303, the words ﬁby virtue of any entry relatingto trade and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Scheduleﬂ shall beomitted.6* *         *          **
(9) PART XIV.
7[In article 312, after the words ﬁthe Statesﬂ, the brackets and wordsﬁ(including the State of Jammu and Kashmir)ﬂ shall be inserted.]1Cl. (i) omitted by C.O. 56.2Cl. (j) relettered as cl. (i) by C.O. 56 and again relettered as cl. (h) by C.O. 66.3Cls. (a) and (b) inserted by C.O. 55 have been omitted by C.O. 56.4Cls. (a), (b) and (c) [relettered as cls. (c), (d) and (e) respectively by C.O. 55] have againbeen relettered as cls. (a), (b) and (c) respectively by C.O. 56.5Subs. by C.O. 94, for ﬁarticles 290 and 291ﬂ.6Brackets and letter ‚(a)™ and cl. (b) omitted by C.O. 56.7Subs., ibid., for the previous modification.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)365 


 1[(10) PART XV.
(a) In clause (1) of article 324, the reference to the Constitution shall, inrelation to elections to either House of the Legislature of Jammu and Kashmir,

be construed as a reference to the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
2[(b) In articles 325, 326, 327 and 329, the reference to a State shall beconstrued as not including a reference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(c) Article 328 shall be omitted.(d) In article 329, the words and figures ﬁor article 328ﬂ shall be omitted.]]3[(e) In article 329A, clauses (4) and (5) shall be omitted.(11) PART XVI.
4* *         *          **
5[(a)] Articles 331, 332, 333, 6[336 and 337] shall be omitted.5[(b)] In articles 334 and 335, references to the State or the States shall beconstrued as not including references to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
7[(c) In clause (1) of article 339, the words ﬁthe administration of theScheduled Areas andﬂ shall be omitted.]
(12) PART XVII.
The provisions of the Part shall apply only in so far as they relate  toŠ
(i) the official language of the Union;
(ii) the official language for communication between one Stateand another, or between a State and the Union; and
(iii) the language of the proceedings in the Supreme Court.1Subs. by C.O. 60, for sub-paragraph (10) (w.e.f. 26-1-1960).
2Subs. by C.O. 75 for cls. (
b) and (c).3Ins. by C.O. 105.4Cl. (a) omitted by C.O. 124.5CIs. (b) and (c) relettered as cls. (a) and (b), ibid.6Subs., ibid., for ﬁ336, 337, 339 and 342ﬂ.7Ins., ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)366 


 (13) PART XVIII.
(a) To article 352, the following new clause shall be added, namely:Š
ﬁ1[(6)] No Proclamation of Emergency made on grounds only ofinternal disturbance or imminent danger thereof shall have effect in
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir (except as respects article
354) 2[unlessŠ(a) it is made at the request or with the concurrence of theGovernment of that State, or(b) where it has not been so made, it is applied subsequentlyby the President to that State at the request or with the concurrence

of the Government of that State.]ﬂ.3[(b) In clause (1) of article 356, references to provisions or provisionof this Constitution shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

be construed as including references to provisions or provision of the
Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
4[(bb) In clause (4) of the article 356, after the second proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:Š‚Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued underclause (1) on the 18th day of July, 1990 with respect to the State of

Jammu and Kashmir, the reference in the first proviso to this clause

to ﬁthree yearsﬂ shall be construed as a reference to 5[ﬁseven yearsﬂ] ™.](c) Article 360 shall be omitted.](14) PART XIX.
6*         *          *             *             *
7[(a)] 8[Article 365] shall be omitted.9*         *          *             *             *
1Subs. by C.O. 104, for ﬁ(4)ﬂ.2Subs. by C.O. 100, for certain words.3Subs. by C.O. 71, for cl. (b).4Added by C.O. 151.5Subs. by C.O. 162 for ﬁsix yearsﬂ.6Cl. (a) omitted by C.O. 74.7Cls. (b) and (c) relettered as cls. (a) and (b), ibid.8Subs. by C.O. 94, for ﬁArticles 362 and 365ﬂ.9Original cl. (c) omitted by C.O. 56.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)367 


 1[(b)] To article 367, there shall be added the following clause,
namely:Šﬁ(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies in relation tothe State of Jammu and KashmirŠ(a) references to this Constitution or to the provisions thereof shallbe construed as references to the Constitution or the provisions thereof
as applied in relation to the said State;
2[(aa) references to the person for the time being recognised by thePresident on the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly of the

State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the

advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in

office, shall be construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and
Kashmir;(b) references to the Government of the said State shall be construedas including references to the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir acting
on the advice of his Council of Ministers:Provided that in respect of any period prior to the 10th day ofApril, 1965, such references shall be construed as including references
to the Sadar-i-Riyasat acting on the advice of his Council of Ministers;](c) references to a High Court shall include references to the HighCourt of Jammu and Kashmir;3*  *           *          * *
4[(d)] references to the permanent residents of the said State shallbe construed as meaning persons who, before the commencement of
the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954

were recognised as State subjects under the laws in force in the State
or who are recognised by any law made by the Legislature of the State
as permanent residents of the State; and
5[(e) references to a Governor shall include references to theGovernor of Jammu and Kashmir:1Cls. (b) and (c) relettered as cls. (a) and (b) by C.O. 74.2Subs. ibid., for cl. (b).3Cl. (d) omitted by C.O. 56.4Cl. (e) relettered as cl. (d), ibid.5Subs. by C.O. 74, for cl. (
e).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)368 


 Provided that in respect of any period prior to the 10th day ofApril, 1965, such references shall be construed as references to the person
recognised by the President as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of Jammu

and Kashmir and as including references to any person recognised by
the President as being competent to exercise the powers of the Sadar-i-
Riyasat.]ﬂ.(15) PART XX.
1[(a)] 2[To clause (2) of article 368], the following proviso shall be
added, namely:ŠﬁProvided further that no such amendment shall have effect inrelation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir unless applied by order

of the President under clause (1) of article 370.ﬂ.3[(b) After clause (3) of article 368, the following clause shall beadded, namely:Šﬁ(4) No law made by the Legislature of the State of Jammu andKashmir seeking to make any change in or in the effect of any
provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir relating toŠ(a) appointment, powers, functions, duties, emoluments,allowances, privileges or immunities of the Governor; or(b) superintendence, direction and control of elections by theElection Commission of India, eligibility for inclusion in the

electoral rolls without discrimination, adult suffrage and
composition of the Legislative Council, being matters specified
in sections 138, 139, 140 and 50 of the Constitution of Jammu and
Kashmir,
shall have any effect unless such law has, after having been reserved forthe  consideration  of the President, received his assent.ﬂ.]
(16) PART XXI.
(a) Articles 369, 371, 
4[371A], 5[372A], 373, clauses (1), (2), (3)and (5) of article 374 and 6[articles 376 to 378A and 392] shallbe omitted.1Numbered as cl. (a) by C.O. 101.2Subs. by C.O. 91, for ﬁTo article 368ﬂ.
3Ins. by C.O. 101.4Ins. by C.O. 74.
5Ins. by C.O. 56.
6Subs. ibid., for ﬁarticles 376 to 392ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)369 


 (b) In article 372Š(i) clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted;     (
ii) references to the laws in force in the territory of India shallinclude references to hidayats, ailans, ishtihars, circulars, robkars,irshads, yadashts, State Council Resolutions, Resolutions of the
Constituent Assembly, and other instruments having the force of

law in the territory of the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and(iii) references to the commencement of the Constitution shall beconstrued as references to the commencement of this Order.
(c) In clause (4) of article 374, the reference to the authority functioningas the Privy Council of a State shall be construed as a reference to the
Advisory Board constituted under the Jammu and Kashmir Constitution
Act, 1996 and references to the commencement of the Constitution shall
be construed as references to the commencement of this Order.
(17) PART XXII.

Articles 394 and 395 shall be omitted.
(18) FIRST SCHEDULE.(19) SECOND SCHEDULE.1*   *               *                   *             *
(20) THIRD SCHEDULE.
 Forms V, VI, VII and VIII shall be omitted.

(21) FOURTH SCHEDULE.2[(22) SEVENTH SCHEDULE.(a) In the Union ListŠ(i) for entry 3, the entry ﬁ3. Administration of cantonments.ﬂ shallbe substituted;3[(ii) entries 8, 9 4[and 34], 5*** entry 79, and the words ﬁInter-Statemigrationﬂ in entry 81 shall be omitted;]1Modification relating to paragraph 6 omitted by C.O. 56.2Subs. by C.O. 66, for sub-paragraph (22).3Subs. by C.O. 85, for item (ii).
4Subs. by C.O. 92, for ﬁ34 and 60ﬂ.5The words and figures ‚the words ﬁand recordsﬂ in the entry 67™ omitted by C.O. 95.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)370 


 1*         *       *          
       *                 *
2[(iii) in entry 72, the reference to the States shall be construed,Š(a) in relation to appeals to the Supreme Court from any decisionor order of the High Court of the State of Jammu and Kashmir made
in an election petition whereby an election to either House of the
Legislature of that State has been called in question, as including a

reference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;(b) in relation to other matters, as not including a reference to thatState]; 3[and]4[(iv) for entry 97, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:Šﬁ5[97. Prevention of activitiesŠ(a) involving terrorist acts directed towards overawing theGovernment as by law established or striking terror in the people or
any section of the people or alienating any section of the people or
adversely affecting the harmony amongst different sections of the
people;(b) directed towards disclaiming, questioning or disrupting thesovereignty and territorial integrity of India or bringing about cession
of a part of the territory of India or secession of a part of the territory
of India from the Union or causing insult to the Indian National
Flag, the Indian National Anthem and this Constitution,taxes on foreign travel by sea or air, on inland air travel and on postal
articles, including money orders, phonograms and telegrams.Explanation.ŠIn this entry, ﬁterrorist actﬂ has the same
meaning as in the  Explanation to article 248.]ﬂ.](b) The State List shall be omitted.1Original item (iii) omitted by C.O. 74.2Subs. by C.O. 83, for item (iii).3Ins. by C.O. 85.
4Subs. by C.O. 93, for item (iv).5Subs. by C.O. 122, for entry 97.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)371 


 1[(c) In the Concurrent ListŠ2[(i) for entry 1, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:Šﬁ1. Criminal law (excluding offences against laws withrespect to any of the matters specified in List I and excluding
the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces
of the Union in aid of the civil power) in so far as such criminal
law relates to offences against laws with respect to any of the
matters specified in this List.ﬂ];3[4[(ia) for entry 2, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:Šﬁ2. Criminal procedure (including prevention of offences andconstitution and organisation of criminal courts, except the Supreme

Court and the High Court) in so far as it relates to,Š(i) offences against laws with respect to any matters beingmatters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws;
and(ii) administration of oaths and taking of affidavits bydiplomatic and consular officers in any foreign country.ﬂ;
(ib) for entry 12, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:Š ﬁ12. Evidence and oaths in so far as they relate to,Š
(i) administration of oaths and taking of affidavits by diplomatic and consular officers in any foreign country; and
(ii) any other matters being matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws.ﬂ;
(ic) for entry 13, the entry ﬁ13. Civil procedure in so far as it relatesto administration of oaths and taking of affidavits by diplomatic and
consular officers in any foreign country.ﬂ shall be substituted;
5*        *            
        *            *                   *
1Subs. by C.O. 69, for cl. (c).2Subs. by C.O. 70, for item (
i).3Ins. by C.O. 94.
4Subs. by C.O. 122, for sub-clauses (ia) and (ib).5Items (ii) and (iii) omitted by C.O. 74.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)372 


 1[2[(ii)] for entry 30, the entry ﬁ30. Vital statistics in so far as they
relate to births and deaths including registration of births and deaths.ﬂ
shall be substituted;]3* *                  *  *                   *
4[(iii) entry 3, entries 5 to 10 (both inclusive), entries 14, 15, 17, 20, 21,27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 37, 38, 41 and 44 shall be omitted;(iiia) for entry 42, the entry ﬁ42. Acquisition and requisitioning ofproperty, so far as regards acquisition of any property covered by entry

67 of List I or entry 40 of List III or of any human work of art which has
artistic or aesthetic value.ﬂ shall be substituted; and5[(iv) in entry 45, for the words and figures ﬁList II or List IIIﬂ, thewords ﬁthis Listﬂ shall be substituted.(23) EIGHTH SCHEDULE.6[(24) NINTH SCHEDULE.7[(a)] After entry 64, the following entries shall be added, namely:Š864A. The Jammu and Kashmir State Kuth Act (No. I of Svt. 1978).8[64B.] The Jammu and Kashmir Tenancy Act (No. II of Svt. 1980).
8[64C.] The Jammu and Kashmir Alienation of Land Act (No. Vof Svt. 1995).9*                 *     *  
                *                              *
10[64D]. The Jammu and Kashmir Big Landed Estates Abolition Act
(No. XVII of Svt. 2007).10[64E]. Order No. 6-H of 1951, dated the 10th March, 1951, regardingResumption of Jagirs and other assignments of land revenue, etc.1Ins. by C.O. 70.
2Item (iv) renumbered as item (ii) by C.O. 74.3Items (v) and (vi) omitted by C.O. 72.4Subs. by C.O. 95, for item (iii).5Item (vi) renumbered as item (iv) by C.O. 74.6Subs., ibid., for sub-paragraph (24).7Numbered by C.O. 105.8Renumbered by C.O. 98.9Omitted by C.O. 106.10Renumbered, ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)373 


 1[64F. The Jammu and Kashmir Restitution of Mortgaged Properties
Act, 1976 (Act XIV of 1976).64G. The Jammu and Kashmir Debtors™ Relief Act, 1976 (Act XV of1976).2[(b) Entries 87 to 124, inserted by the Constitution (Thirty-ninthAmendment) Act, 1975, shall be renumbered as entries 65 to 102
respectively.]
3[(c) Entries 125 to 188 shall be renumbered as entries 103 to 166respectively.]
4[(25) TENTH SCHEDULE.(a) for the brackets, words and figures ﬁArticles 102(2) and 191(2)ﬂ,the brackets, word and figures ﬁ[Article 102(2)]ﬂ shall be substituted;(b) in clause (a) of paragraph 1, the words ﬁor the LegislativeAssembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a

Stateﬂ shall be omitted;(c) in paragraph 2,Š(i) in sub-paragraph (1), in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of theExplanation, the words and figures ﬁor, as the case may be, article
188ﬂ shall be omitted;(ii) in sub-paragraph (3), the words and figures ﬁor, as the case
may be, article 188ﬂ shall be omitted;(iii) in sub-paragraph (4), the reference to the commencement ofthe Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 shall be
construed as a reference to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Amendment Order, 1989;
(d) in paragraph 5, the words ﬁor the Chairman or the DeputyChairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a Stateﬂ shall be omitted;(e) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, the words and figures ﬁor,
as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State within the

meaning of article 212™™ shall be omitted;(f) in sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 8, the words and figures ﬁor,
as the case may be, article 194,ﬂ shall be omitted.]1Ins. by C.O. 106.2Ins. by C.O. 105.3Ins. by C.O. 108 (w.e.f. 31-12-1977).
4Ins. by C.O. 136.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix I)374 


 APPENDIX II RE-STATEMENT, WITH REFERENCE TO THE PRESENT
TEXT OF THE CONSTITUTION, OF THE EXCEPTIONSAND MODIFICATIONS SUBJECT TO WHICH THE
CONSTITUTION APPLIES TO THE  STATE OF
JAMMU AND KASHMIR
[Note.ŠThe exceptions and modifications subject to which the Constitutionapplies to the State of Jammu and Kashmir are either those provided in the
Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 or those

consequential to the non-application to the State of Jammu and Kashmir of
certain amendments to the Constitution. All the exceptions and modifications
which have a practical significance are included in the re-statement which is
only for facility of quick reference. For ascertaining the exact position, reference
will have to be made to the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir)
Order, 1954 and to the text of the Constitution on the 20th June, 1964, as

amended by the subsequent amendments to the Constitution mentioned in
clause 2 of the said Order.]
(1) THE PREAMBLE.(a)  In the first paragraph, omit ﬁSOCIALIST SECULARﬂ;
(b)  in the penultimate paragraph, omit ﬁand integrityﬂ.
(2) PART I.
Article 3.Š
(a) Add the following further proviso, namely:ŠﬁProvided further that no Bill providing for increasing ordiminishing the area of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or altering
the name or boundary of that State shall be introduced in
Parliament without the consent of the Legislature of that State.ﬂ;(b) omit Explanation I and 
Explanation II.
(3) PART II.
(a) This Part shall be deemed to have been applicable in relation to theState of Jammu and Kashmir as from the 26th day of January, 1950.
(b) Article 7.Š Add the following further proviso, namely:Š375 


 ﬁProvided further that nothing in this article shall apply to apermanent resident of the State of Jammu and Kashmir who, after
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, returns
to that territory of that State under a permit for resettlement in that
State or permanent return issued by or under the authority of any
law made by the Legislature of that State, and every such person
shall be deemed to be a citizen of India.ﬂ.(4) PART III.
(a) Article
 13.ŠReferences to the commencement of the Constitution
shall be construed as references to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C.O. 48), 
i.e., the 14thday of May, 1954.
*            *           *           *  *
(c) Article
 16.Š In clause (3), reference to the State shall be construed
as not including a reference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(d) Article
 19.Š
(A) In clause (1),Š(i) in sub-clause (e), omit ﬁandﬂ at the end;(ii) after sub-clause (e), insert the following clause, namely:Šﬁ(f) to acquire, hold and dispose of property; andﬂ;
(B) in clause (5), for ﬁsub-clauses (
d) and (e)ﬂ, substitute ﬁsub-clauses (d), (e) and (f)ﬂ.(e) Article 22.Š In clauses (4) and (7), for ﬁParliamentﬂ, substitute ﬁtheLegislature of the Stateﬂ.(f) Article 30.ŠOmit clause (1A).(g) After article 30, insert the following, namely:ŠﬁRight to Property31. Compulsory acquisition of property
.Š(1) No person shall be deprived ofhis property save by authority of law.
(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or requisitioned savefor a public purpose and save by authority of a law which provides for
acquisition or requisitioning of the property for an amount which may be
fixed by such law or which may be determined in accordance with such
principles and given in such manner as may be specified in such law;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)376 


 and no such law shall be called in question in any court on the groundthat the amount so fixed or determined is not adequate or that the whole
or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise than in cash:Provided that in making any law providing for the compulsoryacquisition of any property of an educational institution established
and administered by a minority, referred to in clause (1) of article 30, the

State shall ensure that the amount fixed by or determined under such
law for the acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict or
abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.(2A) Where a law does not provide for the transfer of the ownershipor right to possession of any property to the State or to a Corporation
owned or controlled by the State, it shall not be deemed to provide for
the compulsory acquisition or requisitioning of property, notwithstanding

that it deprives any person of his property.
(2B) Nothing in sub-clause (f) of clause (1) of article 19 shall affectany such law as is referred to in clause (2).**           **           *
(5) Nothing in clause 2 shall affectŠ(a) the provisions of any existing law; or(b) the provisions of any law which the State may hereafter makeŠ(i) for the purpose of imposing or levying any tax or penalty; or(ii) for the promotion of public health or the prevention of dangerto life or property; or(iii) with respect to property declared by law to be evacueeproperty.ﬂ.
  *                   *               *                **
(h) After article 31, omit the following sub-heading, namely:ŠﬁSaving of Certain Lawsﬂ
(i) Article 
31A.Š(A) In clause (1),Š(i) for ﬁarticle 14 or article 19ﬂ, substitute ﬁarticle 14, article 19 orarticle 31ﬂ;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)377 


 (ii) omit the first proviso to clause (1);(iii) in the second proviso omit ﬁfurtherﬂ;(B) in clause (2), for sub-clause (a), substitute the following sub-clause,namely:Š‚(a) ﬁestateﬂ shall mean land which is occupied or has been let foragricultural purposes or for purposes subservient to agriculture, or for

pasture, and includesŠ(i) sites of buildings and other structures on such land;(ii) trees standing on such land;(iii) forest land and wooded waste;(iv) area covered by or fields floating over water;(v) sites of jandars and gharats;
(vi) any jagir, inam, muafi 
or mukarrari
 or other similar grant,
but does not includeŠ
                    (i) the site of any building in any town, or town area or villageabadi or any land appurtenant to any such building or site;(ii) any land which is occupied as the site of a town or village; or                         (iii) any land reserved for building purposes in a municipality ornotified area or cantonment or town area or any area for which a
town planning scheme is sanctioned;™.(j) Article
 31C.Š This article is not applicable to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
(k) Article
 32.Š Omit clause (3).
(l) Article
 35.Š
(A) References to the commencement of the Constitution shall beconstrued as references to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C.O. 48), 
i.e., the14th day of May, 1954;
(B) in clause (a) (i), omit ﬁclause (3) of article 16, clause (3) ofarticle 32ﬂ;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)378 


 (C) after clause (b), add the following clause, namely:Šﬁ(c) no law with respect to preventive detention made by theLegislature of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, whether before or

after the commencement of the Constitution (Application to
Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954, shall be void on the ground

that it is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Part, but
any such law shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, cease to

have effect on the expiration of twenty-five years from the
commencement of the said Order, except as respects things done

or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof.ﬂ.(m) After article 35, add the following article, namely:Šﬁ35A. Saving of laws with respect to permanent residents and their rights.ŠNotwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, no existing
law in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and no law hereafter

enacted by the Legislature of the State,Š(a) defining the classes of persons who are, or shall be, permanentresidents of the State of Jammu and Kashmir; or(b) conferring on such permanent residents any special rights andprivileges or imposing upon other persons any restrictions as respectsŠ(i) employment under the State Government;(ii) acquisition of immovable property in the State;(iii) settlement in the State; or(iv) right to scholarships and such other forms of aid as the StateGovernment may provide,shall be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away orabridges any rights conferred on the other citizens of India by any provision
of this Part.ﬂ.(5) PART IV.ŠThis part is not applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(6) PART IVA.ŠThis part is not applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(7) PART V.Š

(a) Article 55.Š
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)379 


 (A) For the purposes of this article, the population of the State ofJammu and   Kashmir shall be deemed to be sixty-three lakhs;
(B) in the 
Explanation omit the proviso.(b) Article 81.ŠFor clauses (2) and (3), substitute the following clauses,
namely:Šﬁ(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),Š(a) there shall be allotted to the State six seats in the House of thePeople;(b) the State shall be divided into single-member territorialconstituencies by the Delimitation Commission constituted under
the Delimitation Act, 1972, in accordance with such procedure as
the Commission may deem fit;
(c) the constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographicallycompact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to physical
features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of
communication and public convenience; and(d) the constituencies into which the State is divided shall notcomprise the area under the occupation of Pakistan.(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall affect the representation of the State inthe House of the People until the dissolution of the House existing on the
date of publication in the Gazette of India of the final order or orders of
the Delimitation Commission relating to the delimitation of parliamentary
constituencies under the Delimitation Act, 1972.(4) (a) The Delimitation Commission shall associate with itself for thepurpose of assisting it in its duties in respect of the State, five persons
who shall be members of the House of the People representing the State.(b) The persons to be so associated from the State shall be nominatedby the Speaker of the House of the People having due regard to the
composition of the House.(c) The first nominations to be made under sub-clause (
b) shall bemade by the Speaker of the House of the People within two months from
the commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Second Amendment Order, 1974.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)380 


 (d) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or tosign any decision of the Delimitation Commission.(e) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associatemember falls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable
by the Speaker of the House of the People and in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clauses (a) and (b).ﬂ.(c) Article 82.Š Omit the second and third provisos.
(d) Article 105.Š In clause (3), for ﬁshall be those of that House and of
its members and committees immediately before the coming into force of
section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978ﬂ substitute
ﬁshall be those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United
Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the commencement of this
Constitutionﬂ.(e) For article 132, substitute the following article, namely:Š
‚132. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courtsin certain cases.Š(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from anyjudgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of India,

whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, if the High Court certifies
that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation
of this Constitution.(2) Where the High Court has refused to give such a certificate, theSupreme Court may, 
if it is satisfied that the case involves a substantialquestion of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution, grant special
leave to appeal from such judgment, decree or final order.
(3) Where such a certificate is given, or such leave is granted, anyparty in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that
any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided and, with the
leave of the Supreme Court, on any other ground.Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, the expression ﬁfinalorderﬂ includes an order deciding an issue which, if decided in favour
of the appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.™.(f) Article 133.Š
(A) In clause (1), omit ﬁunder article 134Aﬂ;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)381 


 (B) after clause (1), insert the following clause, namely:Š              ‚(1A) The provisions of section 3 of the Constitution (Thirtieth
Amendment) Act, 1972, shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir subject to the modification that references therein to
ﬁthis Actﬂ, ﬁthe commencement of this Actﬂ, ﬁthis Act had not been
passedﬂ and ﬁas amended by this Actﬂ shall be construed
respectively as references to ﬁthe Constitution (Application to Jammu
and Kashmir) Second Amendment 
Order, 1974ﬂ, ﬁthe
commencement of the said Orderﬂ, ﬁthe said Order had not been
madeﬂ and ﬁas it stands after the commencement of the said
Orderﬂ.™.(g) Article 134.Š
(A) In clause (1), in sub-clause (c), omit ﬁunder article 134Aﬂ;(B) in clause (2), after ﬁParliament mayﬂ insert ﬁon the request ofthe Legislature of the Stateﬂ.(h) Articles 134A, 135, 139 and 139A.Š These articles are not applicable
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(i) Article 145.Š In clause (1), omit sub-clause (
cc).(j) Article 150.Š For ﬁas the President may, on the advice of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribeﬂ substitute ﬁas the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, with the approval of the President

prescribeﬂ.(8) PART VI.
(a) Omit articles 153 to 217, article 219, article 221, articles 223, 224,224A and 225, articles 227 to 233, article 233A and articles 234 to 237.(b) Article 220.Š References to the commencement of the Constitutionshall be construed as references to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Amendment Order, 1960, 
i.e., the26th January, 1960.
(c) Article 222.Š After clause (1), insert the following clause,namely:Šﬁ(1A) Every such transfer from the High Court of Jammu andKashmir or to that High Court shall be made after consultation with
the Governor.ﬂ.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)382 


 (d) Article
 226.Š
(A) Renumber clause (2) as clause (1A);(B) omit clause (3);(C) renumber clause (4) as clause (2); and in clause (2) as sorenumbered, for ﬁthis articleﬂ substitute ﬁclause (1) or clause (1A)ﬂ.(9) PART VIII.Š This part is not applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(10) PART X.Š This part is not applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(11) PART XI.
(a) Article
 246.Š
(A) in clause (1), for ﬁclauses (2) and (3)ﬂ substitute ﬁclause (2)ﬂ;(B) in clause (2), omit ﬁNotwithstanding anything in clause (3),ﬂ;(C) omit clauses (3) and (4).(b) For article 248, substitute the following article, namely:Š‚248. Residuary powers of legislation.ŠParliament has exclusivepower to make any law with respect toŠ(a) prevention of activities involving terrorist acts directedtowards overawing the Government as by law established or striking
terror in the people or any section of the people or alienating any

section of the people or adversely affecting the harmony amongst
different sections of the people;(aa) prevention of other activities directed towards disclaiming,questioning or disrupting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
India or bringing about cession of a part of the territory of India or
secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union or causing
insult to the Indian National Flag, the Indian National Anthem and
this Constitution; and(b) taxes onŠ(i) foreign travel by sea or air;(ii) inland air travel;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)383 


 (iii) postal articles, including money orders, phonogramsand telegrams.Explanation.Š In this article, ﬁterrorist actﬂ means any act or thingby using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or
inflammable substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or

poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or any other substances
(whether biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature.™.(bb) Article
 249, in clause (1), for ﬁany matter enumerated in the
State List specified in the resolutionﬂ, substitute ﬁany matter

specified in the resolution, being a matter which is not enumerated
in the Union List or in the Concurrent Listﬂ.(c) Article 250.ŠFor ﬁto any of the matters enumerated in the StateListﬂ substitute ﬁalso to matters not enumerated in the Union Listﬂ.(d) Omit clause (d).(e) Article 253.Š Add the following proviso, namely:Š
ﬁProvided that after the commencement of the Constitution(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954, no decision

affecting the disposition of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall
be made by the Government of India without the consent of the

Government of that State.ﬂ.(f) Omit article 255.(g) Article 256.ŠRenumber this article as clause (1) thereof, and
add the following new clause thereto, namely:Šﬁ(2) The State of Jammu and Kashmir shall so exercise its
executive power as to facilitate the discharge by the Union of its
duties and responsibilities under the Constitution in relation to
that State; and in particular, the said State shall, if so required by

the Union, acquire or requisition property on behalf and at the
expense of the Union, or if the property belongs to the State, transfer
it to the Union on such terms as may be agreed, or in default of

agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by

the Chief Justice of India.ﬂ.(h) Article
 261.ŠIn clause (2), omit ﬁmade by Parliamentﬂ.
(12) PART XII.
(a) Articles 266, 282, 284, 298, 299 and 300. ŠIn these articles
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)384 


 references to the State or States shall be construed as not includingreferences to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;(b) omit clause (2) of article 267, article 273, clause (2) of article 283and article 290;(c) Articles
 277 and 295.ŠIn these articles references to the
commencement of the Constitution shall be construed as references to
the commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Order, 1954, 
i.e., the 14th day of May, 1954.
(d) Omit the sub-heading ﬁC
HAPTER  IV.Š R
IGHT TO PROPERTY
ﬂ andarticle 300A.(13) PART XIII.
In article 303, in clause (1), omit ﬁby virtue of any entry relating totrade and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Scheduleﬂ.
(14) PART XIV.
Except in article 312, reference to ﬁStateﬂ in this Part does not includethe State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(15) PART XIVA.
This Part is not applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(16) PART XV.Š
(a) Article 324.Š In clause (1), the reference to the Constitution shall,
in relation to elections to either House of the Legislature of Jammu and
Kashmir, be construed as a reference to the Constitution of Jammu and

Kashmir.
(b) Articles 325, 326 and 327.Š In these articles the references to a
State shall be construed as not including a reference to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
(c) Omit article 328.(d) Article 329.Š
(A) Reference to a State shall be construed as not including areference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;(B) omit ﬁor article 328ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)385 


 (17) PART XVI. Š
Original clause (
a) omitted and clauses (b) and (c) relettered as clauses(a) and (b).(a) Omit articles 331, 332, 333, 336 and 337.(b) Articles 334 and 335.ŠReferences to the State or the States shallbe construed as not including references to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
(c) Article 339, in clause (1), omit ﬁthe administration of the ScheduledAreas andﬂ.(18) PART XVII. ŠThe provisions of this Part shall apply to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir only in so far as they relate toŠ(i)  The official language of the Union;
(ii) the official language for communication between one Stateand another, or between a State and the Union; and
(iii) The language of the proceedings in the Supreme Court.(19) PART XVIII.
(a) For article 352, substitute the following article, namely :Š
ﬁ352. Proclamation of Emergency.Š(1) If the President is satisfiedthat a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or of any
part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external
aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by Proclamation, make a

declaration to that effect.(2) A proclamation issued under clause (1)Š(a) may be revoked by a subsequent Proclamation;(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament;(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months unlessbefore the expiration of that period it has been approved by
resolutions of both Houses of Parliament:Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when theHouse of the People has been dissolved or the dissolution of the House
of the People takes place during the period of two  months  referred to in

sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has beenpassed by the Council of States but no resolution with respect to suchTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)386 


 Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People before theexpiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the

expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People

first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said
period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been
also passed by the House of the People.(3) A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of Indiaor of any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression or by internal disturbance  may be made before the actual

occurrence of war or of any such aggression or disturbance if the
President is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.(4) The power conferred on the President by this article shall includethe power to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, being
war or external aggression or internal disturbance or imminent danger
of war or external aggression or internal disturbance, whether or not
there is a Proclamation already issued by the President under clause (1)
and such Proclamation is in operation.(5) Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution,Š(a) the satisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) andclause (3) shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned
in any court on any ground;(b) subject to the provisions of clause (2), neither the SupremeCourt nor any other Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
question, on any ground, regarding the validity of Š(i) a declaration made by Proclamation by the President to theeffect stated in clause (1); or(ii) the continued operation of such Proclamation.(6) No Proclamation of Emergency made on grounds only of internaldisturbance or imminent danger thereof shall have effect in relation to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir (except as respects article 354) unlessŠ
(a) it is made at the request or with the concurrence of theGovernment of that State; or(b) where it has not been so made, it is applied subsequently bythe President to that State at the request or with the concurrence of

the Government of that State.ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)387 


 (b) Article 353.Š Omit the proviso.
(c) Article 356.Š
(A) In clause (1), reference to provisions or provision of thisConstitution shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, be

construed as including references to provisions or provision of the
Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir;(B) in clause (4),Š(i) for the opening portion, substitute the following, namely:ŠﬁA Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to
operate on the expiration of a period of six  months from the date

of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the
Proclamation under clause (3)ﬂ;(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall beinserted, namely :Š‚Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issuedunder clause (1) on the 18th day of July, 1990 with respect to the

State of Jammu and Kashmir, the reference in the fist proviso to

this clause to ﬁthree yearsﬂ shall be construed as a reference to
ﬁseven yearsﬂ.™.(C) for clause (5), substitute the following clause, namely :Šﬁ(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, thesatisfaction of the President mentioned in clause (1) shall be final
and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court on any
ground.ﬂ.(d) Article 357.Š  For clause (2), substitute the following clause,
namely :Šﬁ(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature ofthe State by Parliament or the President or other authority referred to
in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament or the President orsuch other authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation
under article 356, have been competent to make shall, to the extent of
the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period

of one year after the Proclamation has ceased to operate except as
respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration ofTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)388 


 the said period, unless the provisions which shall so cease to haveeffect are sooner repealed or re-enacted with or without modification
by Act of the appropriate Legislature.ﬂ.(e) For article 358, substitute the following article, namely :Šﬁ358. Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.ŠWhile a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in
article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III
to make any law or to take any executive action which the State
would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent

to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the
incompetency, cease to have effect 
as soon as the Proclamation
ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be
done before the law so ceases to have effect.ﬂ.(f) Article
 359, Š
(A) in clause (1) omit ﬁ(except articles 20 and 21)ﬂ;(B) in clause (1A),Š(i) omit ﬁ(except articles 20 and 21)ﬂ;(ii) omit the proviso;(C) omit clause (1B);(D) in clause (2), omit the proviso.(g) omit article 360.(20) PART XIX.
(a) Article 361A.ŠThis article is not applicable to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(b) Omit article 365.(c) Article 367.ŠAfter clause (3), add the following clause, namely:Š
ﬁ(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies inrelation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir Š(a) references to this Constitution or to the provisionsthereof shall be construed as references to the Constitution or
the provisions thereof as applied in relation to the said State;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)389 


 (aa) references to the person for the time beingrecognised by the President on the recommendation of the
Legislative Assembly of the State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of
Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the advice of the Council of

Ministers of the State for the time being in office, shall be
construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and
Kashmir;(b) references to the Government of the said State shall beconstrued as including references to the Governor of Jammu
and Kashmir acting on the advice of his Council of Ministers:Provided that in respect of any period prior to the 10thday of April, 1965, such references shall be construed as
including references to the Sadar-i-Riyasat acting on the
advice of his Council of Ministers;(c) references to a High Court shall include references tothe High Court of Jammu and Kashmir;(d) references to the permanent residents of the said State
shall be construed as meaning persons who, before the

commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Order, 1954, were recognised as State subjects under

the laws in force in the State or who are recognised by any
law made by the Legislature of the State as permanent
residents of the State; and(e) references to a Governor shall include references to theGovernor of Jammu and Kashmir :Provided that in respect of any period prior to the 10thday of April, 1965, such references shall be construed as
references to the person recognised by the President as the

Sadar-i-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir and as including
references to any person recognised by the President as being
competent to exercise the powers of the Sadar-i-Riyasat.(21) PART XX.
Article 368.Š(a) in clause (2), add the following further proviso, namely:ŠﬁProvided further that no such amendment shall have effectin relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir unless applied by
order of the President under clause (1) of article 370.ﬂ;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)390 


 (b) Omit clauses (4) and (5) and after clause (3) add the followingclause, namely :Šﬁ(4) No law made by the Legislature of the State of Jammu andKashmir seeking to make any change in or in the effect of any provision
of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir relating to:Š(a) appointment, powers, functions, duties, emoluments,allowances, privileges or immunities of the Governor; or(b) superintendence, direction and control of elections by the
Election Commission of India, eligibility for inclusion in the electoral
rolls without discrimination, adult suffrage and composition of the
Legislative Council, being matters specified in sections 138, 139,
140 and 50 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir,
shall have any effect unless such law has, after having been reserved forthe consideration of the President, received his assent.ﬂ.(22) PART XXI.Š
(a) Omit articles 369, 371, 371A, 372A, 373 and articles 376 to 378Aand 392.(b) Article 372.Š(A) Omit clauses (2) and (3) ;(B) references to the laws in force in the territory of India shall
include references to hidayats, ailans, ishtihars, circulars, robkars,
irshads, yadashts, State Council Resolutions, Resolutions of the
Constituent Assembly, and other instruments having the force of

law in the territory of the State of Jammu and Kashmir;(C) references to the commencement of the Constitution shall beconstrued as references to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C.O. 48), 
i.e., the14th day of May, 1954.
(c) Article
 374. Š
(A) Omit clauses (1), (2), (3) and (5);(B) in clause (4), the reference to the authority functioning asthe Privy Council of a State shall be construed as a reference to
the Advisory Board constituted under the Jammu and KashmirTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)391 


 Constitution Act, Svt. 1996, and references to the commencementof the Constitution shall be construed as references to the
commencement of the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Order, 1954, 
i.e., the 14th day of May, 1954.
(23) PART XXII.ŠOmit articles 394 and 395.

(24) THIRD SCHEDULE.ŠOmit forms V, VI, VII and VIII.

(25) FIFTH SCHEDULE.ŠThis Schedule is not applicable to theState of Jammu and Kashmir.
(26) SIXTH SCHEDULE.ŠThis Schedule is not applicable to theState of Jammu and Kashmir.
(27) SEVENTH SCHEDULE.Š(a) List I ŠUnion List:Š(A) Omit entry 2A;(B) For entry 3, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
ﬁ3. Administration of cantonments.ﬂ:(C) Omit entries 8, 9, 34 and 79;(D) In entry 72, the reference to the States shall be construed.Š(i) in relation to appeals to the Supreme Court from anydecision or order of the High Court of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir made in an election petition whereby an election to either
House of the Legislature of that State has been called in question,
as including a reference to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;(ii) in relation to other matters, as not including a referenceto that State;(E) In entry 81, omit ﬁInter-State migrationﬂ;(F) For entry 97, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
‚97. Prevention of activitiesŠ(a) involving terrorist acts directed towards overawingthe Government as by law established or striking terror in
the people or any section of the people or alienating any
section of the people or adversely affecting the harmony
amongst different sections of the people;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)392 


 (b) directed towards disclaiming, questioning ordisrupting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India
or bringing about cession of a part of the territory of India or
secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union or
causing insult to the Indian National flag, the Indian
National Anthem and this Constitution;taxes on foreign travel by sea or air, on inland air travel and on
postal articles, including  money orders, phonograms and telegrams.
Explanation.Š In this entry, ﬁterrorist actﬂ has the same
meaning as in the  Explanation to article 248.™.
(b) Omit List IIŠState List.(c) List IIIŠ Concurrent List.Š
(A) For entry 1, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
ﬁ1. Criminal law (excluding offences against laws with respectto any of the matters specified in List I and excluding the use of
naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in
aid of the civil power) in so far as such criminal law relates to
offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in
this List.ﬂ;(B) for entry 2, substitute the following entry, namely:Š
ﬁ2. Criminal procedure (including prevention of offences andconstitution and organisation of criminal courts, except the Supreme
Court and the High Court) in so far as it relates to,Š(i) offences against laws with respect to any matters beingmatters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws;
and(ii) administration of oaths and taking of affidavits bydiplomatic and consular officers in any foreign country.ﬂ;
(C) omit entry 3, entries 5 to 10 (both inclusive), entries 14, 15, 17,20, 21, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 37, 38, 41 and 44;(D) entries 11A, 17A, 17B, 20A and 33A are not applicable to the
State of Jammu and Kashmir;(E) for entry 12, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)393 


 ﬁ12. Evidence and oaths in so far as they relate to,Š(i) administration of oaths and taking of affidavits bydiplomatic and consular officers in any foreign country; and(ii) any other matter being matters with respect to whichParliament has power to make laws.ﬂ;(F)  for entry 13, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
ﬁ13. Civil procedure in so far as it relates to administrationof oaths and taking of affidavits by diplomatic and consular
officers in any foreign country.ﬂ;
(G)  for entry 25, substitute the following entry, namely :Š
ﬁ25. Vocational and technical training of labour.ﬂ;
(H)  for entry 30, substitute the following entry, namely:Š
ﬁ30. Vital statistics in so far as they relate to births and
deaths including  registration   of births and deaths.ﬂ;(I)  for entry 42, substitute the following entry, namely:Š
ﬁ42 Acquisition and requisitioning of property, so far as
regards acquisition of any property covered by entry 67 of
List I or entry 40 of List III or of any human work of art which
has artistic or aesthetic value.ﬂ;(J) in entry 45, for ﬁList II or List IIIﬂ substitute ﬁthis Listﬂ.(28) NINTH SCHEDULE.Š(a) After entry 64, add the following entries, namely :Šﬁ64A. The Jammu and Kashmir State Kuth Act (No. 1 of Svt.1978).
64B. The Jammu and Kashmir Tenancy Act (No. II of Svt. 1980).

64C. The Jammu and Kashmir Alienation of Land Act (No. V ofSvt. 1995).64D. The Jammu and Kashmir Big Landed Estates Abolition Act(No. XVII of Svt. 2007).64E. Order No. 6-H of 1951, dated the 10th March, 1951, regardingResumption of Jagirs and other assignments of land revenue, etc.64F. The Jammu and Kashmir Restitution of Mortgaged Properties
Act, 1976 (Act XIV of 1976).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)394 


 64G.  The Jammu and Kashmir Debtors™ Relief Act, 1976 (Act XV
of 1976).ﬂ.(b) entries 65 to 86 are not applicable to the State of Jammu andKashmir;(c) after entry 86, insert the following entry, namely:Š
ﬁ87. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of1951), the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1974
(Central Act 58 of 1974) and the Election Laws (Amendment) Act,
1975 (Central Act 40 of 1975).ﬂ;(d) after entry 91, insert the following entry, namely:Š
ﬁ92. The maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971 (Central Act26 of 1971).ﬂ;(e) after entry 129, insert the following entry, namely :Š
ﬁ130. The Prevention of Publication of Objectionable Matter Act,1976 (Central Act 27 of 1976).ﬂ;(f) after insertion of the entries 87, 92 and 130 as indicated above,renumber entries 87 to 188 as 
entries 65 to 166 respectively.
(29) TENTH SCHEDULE.Š(a) for the brackets, words and figures ﬁ[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]ﬂ,the brackets,  word and figures ﬁ[Article 102(2)]ﬂ shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a) of paragraph 1, the words ﬁor the LegislativeAssembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a

Stateﬂ shall be omitted;(c) in paragraph 2,Š(i) in sub-paragraph (1), in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of theExplanation, the words and figures ﬁor, as the case may be, article
188ﬂ shall be omitted;(ii) in sub-paragraph (3), the words and figures ﬁor, as the case
may be, article 188ﬂ shall be omitted;(iii) in sub-paragraph (4), the reference to the commencement ofthe Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 shall be
construed as a reference to the commencement of the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Amendment Order, 1989;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)395 


 (d) in paragraph 5, the words ﬁor the Chairman or the DeputyChairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a Stateﬂ shall be
omitted;(e) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, the words and figuresﬁor, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State

within the meaning of article 212ﬂ shall be omitted;(f) in sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 8, the words and figuresﬁor, as the case may be, article 194,ﬂ shall be omitted.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Appendix II)396


  


 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIACONTENTSPAGESPREAMBLE.................................................................................................................................1
PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORYARTICLES1.Name and territory of the Union...................................................................2
2.Admission or establishment of new States................................................2
2A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................2
3.Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or namesof existing States................................................................................................2-3
4.Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment ofthe First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental and
consequential matters.......................................................................................3
PART II
CITIZENSHIP5.Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution..........................4
6.Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to Indiafrom Pakistan......................................................................................................4
7.Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan
.............................5
8.Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residingoutside India
.......................................................................................................5
9.Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to becitizens...................................................................................................................5
10.Continuance of the rights of citizenship.....................................................5
11.Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law...........................5
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General12.Definition..............................................................................................................6
13.Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights.......6
Right to Equality14.Equality before law...........................................................................................6
15.Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sexor place of birth..................................................................................................7
 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES16.Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment..................7-8
17.Abolition of Untouchability............................................................................8
18.Abolition of titles...............................................................................................8-9
Right to Freedom19.Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc..............9-1020.Protection in respect of conviction for offences........................................10
21.Protection of life and personal liberty..........................................................10
21A.Right to education.............................................................................................11
22.Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases........................1
1-12Right against Exploitation23.Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.....................13
24.Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.........................13
Right to  Freedom of Religion
25.Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagationof religio
n..............................................................................................................13
26.Freedom to manage religious affairs...........................................................13-1427.Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particularreligion...................................................................................................................14
28.Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worshipin certain educational institutions................................................................14
Cultural and Educational Rights29.Protection of interests of minorities.............................................................14
30.Right of minorities to establish and administer educationalinstitutions...........................................................................................................14-1531.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................15
Saving of Certain Laws31A.Saving of Laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc......................
15-1731B.Validation of certain Acts and Regulations
...............................................17
31C.Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles...................17-1831D.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................18
Right to Constitutional Remedies32.Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part...................18
32A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................18
33.Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part intheir application to Forces, etc.......................................................................19
34.Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is inforce in any area.................................................................................................19
35.Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part..........................19-20Contents(ii) 


 PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES36.Definition..............................................................................................................21
37.Application of the principles contained in this Part
...............................21
38.State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of thepeople....................................................................................................................21
39.Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State........................21-2239A.Equal justice and free legal aid...
...................................................................22
40.Organisation of village panchayats.............................................................22
41.Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certaincases.......................................................................................................................22
42.Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternityrelief........................................................................................................................22
43.Living wage, etc., for workers........................................................................22-2343A.Participation of workers in management of industries..........................23
44.Uniform civil code for the citizens................................................................23
45.Provision for free and compulsory education for children....................23
46.Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes,Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections
.............................................23
47.Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard ofliving and to improve public health.............................................................23
48.Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry...............................23
48A.Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding offorests and wild life...........................................................................................24
49.Protection of monuments and places and objects of nationalimportance...........................................................................................................24
50.Separation of judiciary from executive.......................................................24
51.Promotion of international peace and security
.........................................24
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A.Fundamental duties..........................................................................................25
PART V
THE UNIONCHAPTER I.ŠT
HE EXECUTIVEThe President and Vice-President
52.The President of India
......................................................................................26
53.Executive power of the Union........................................................................26
54.Election of President..........................................................................................26
55.Manner of election of President...
...................................................................
27-2856.Term of office of President
..............................................................................28
57.Eligibility for re-election...................................................................................28
58.Qualifications for election as President.......................................................28-2959.Conditions of President™s office.....................................................................29
Contents(iii) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES60.Oath or affirmation by the President...........................................................29-3061.Procedure for impeachment of the President............................................30
62.Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President and
the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy....................30-3163.The Vice-President of India
.............................................................................31
64.The Vice-President to be 
ex officio Chairman of the Council of
States.....................................................................................................................31
65.The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his functions
during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of
President...............................................................................................................31
66.Election of Vice-President
................................................................................31-3267.Term of office of Vice-President
.....................................................................32-3368.Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy...........33
69.Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President
..................................................33
70.Discharge of President™s functions in other contingencies.....................33
71.Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President orVice-President
......................................................................................................33-3472.Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remitor commute sentences in certain cases........................................................34
73.Extent of executive power of the Union......................................................35
Council of Ministers74.Council of Ministers  to aid and advise President
...................................35
75.Other provisions as to Ministers....................................................................36
The Attorney-General for India76.Attorney-General for India
..............................................................................36-37Conduct of Government Business77.Conduct of business of the Government of India....................................37
78.Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to
the President, etc................................................................................................37-38CHAPTER  II.ŠP
ARLIAMENTGeneral79.Constitution of Parliament.............................................................................38
80.Composition of the Council of States..........................................................38
81.Composition of the House of the People....................................................39-4082.Readjustment after each census....................................................................40
83.Duration of Houses of Parliament...............................................................40-4184.Qualification for membership of Parliament............................................41
85.Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.............................41
86.Right of President to address and send messages to Houses..............41-4287.Special address by the President...................................................................42
88.Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses............42
Contents(iv) 


 Officers of ParliamentARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES89.The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States..........42
90.Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy
Chairman..............................................................................................................42-4391.Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the dutiesof the office of, or to act as, Chairman........................................................43
92.The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while aresolution for his removal from office is under consideration.............43
93.The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People............43
94.Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker
and Deputy Speaker.........................................................................................44
95.Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the dutiesof the office of, or to act as, Speaker............................................................44
96.The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while aresolution for his removal from office is under consideration.............44-4597.Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman andthe Speaker and Deputy Speaker..................................................................45
98.Secretariat of Parliament.................................................................................45
Conduct of Business99.Oath or affirmation by members..................................................................46
100.Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.........................................................................................................46
Disqualifications of Members101.Vacation of seats
................................................................................................46-48102.Disqualifications for membership.................................................................48
103.Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members...................48-49104.Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmationunder article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified
................49
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members105.Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the
members and committees thereof.................................................................49-50106.Salaries and allowances of members...........................................................50
Legislative Procedure107.Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills..................................50
108.Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases..............................................50-52109.Special procedure in respect of Money Bills
..............................................52-53110.Definition of ﬁMoney Billsﬂ............................................................................53-54111.Assent to Bills....
.................................................................................................54
Procedure in Financial Matters112.Annual financial statement
............................................................................54-56113.Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.................................56
Contents(v) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES114.Appropriation Bills...........................................................................................56-57115.Supplementary, additional or excess grants
.............................................57
116.Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.....................
57-58117.Special provisions as to financial Bills........................................................58-59Procedure Generally118.Rules of procedure.............................................................................................59
119.Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financialbusiness.................................................................................................................59-60120.Language to be used in Parliament.............................................................60
121.Restriction on discussion in Parliament......................................................60
122.Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament............................60
CHAPTER III.ŠL
EGISLATIVE
 POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT123.Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess ofParliament............................................................................................................60-61CHAPTER IV.ŠT
HE UNION JUDICIARY
124.Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court.................................61-63125.Salaries, etc., of Judges....................................................................................63
126.Appointment of acting Chief Justice...........................................................63-64127.Appointment of ad hoc
 judges
.......................................................................64
128.Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court..........64
129.Supreme Court to be a court of record.......................................................65
130.Seat of Supreme Court.....................................................................................65
131.Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court...............................................65
131A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................65
132.Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courtsin certain cases....................................................................................................65-66133.Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courtsin regard to Civil matters................................................................................66
134.Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.......67
134A.Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.............................................67-68135.Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law tobe exercisable by the Supreme Court...........................................................68
136.Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.........................................68
137.Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court..........................68
138.Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court..........................68
139.Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs......68
139A.Transfer of certain cases
...................................................................................69
140.Ancillary powers of Supreme Court............................................................69
141.Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts...............69
142.Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders asto discovery, etc.
.................................................................................................69-70143.Power of President to consult Supreme Court.........................................70
144.Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court......70
144A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................70
Contents(vi) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES145.Rules of Court, etc.
............................................................................................71-72146.Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court...........72-73147.Interpretation.......................................................................................................73
CHAPTER V.ŠC
OMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
-GENERAL OF INDIA148.Comptroller and Auditor-General of India................................................73-74149.Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General..............74-75150.Form of accounts of the Union and of the States....................................75
151.Audit reports.......................................................................................................75
PART VI
THE STATES
CHAPTER I.ŠG
ENERAL152.Definition..............................................................................................................76
CHAPTER II.ŠT
HE EXECUTIVEThe Governor153.Governors of States...........................................................................................76
154.Executive power of State.................................................................................76
155.Appointment of Governor...............................................................................76
156.Term of office of Governor
..............................................................................76-77157.Qualifications for appointment as Governor............................................77
158.Conditions of Governor™s office
.....................................................................77
159.Oath or affirmation by the Governor...........................................................77-78160.Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain contingencies..............78
161.Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remitor commute sentences in certain cases........................................................78
162.Extent of executive power of State...............................................................78
Council of Ministers163.Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor....................................78-79164.Other provisions as to Ministers....................................................................79-80The Advocate-General for the State165.Advocate-General for the State...
...................................................................80
Conduct of Government Business166.Conduct of business of the Government of a State.................................81-81167.Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information toGovernor, etc.
.......................................................................................................81
CHAPTER III.ŠT
HE STATE
 LEGISLATURE
General168.Constitution of Legislatures in States.........................................................81-82169.Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States..........................82
Contents(vii) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES170.Composition of the Legislative Assemblies...............................................82-83171.Composition of the Legislative Councils....................................................83-85172.Duration of State Legislatures.......................................................................85
173.Qualification for membership of the State Legislature..........................85
174.Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution..........86
175.Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House orHouses...................................................................................................................86
176.Special address by the Governor...................................................................86
177.Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the Houses...............86-87Officers of the State Legislature178.The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly..........87
179.Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker
and Deputy Speaker.........................................................................................87
180.Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the dutiesof the office of, or to act as, Speaker............................................................87-88181.The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while aresolution for his removal from office is under consideration.............88
182.The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council......88
183.Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.................................................................88-89184.Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the dutiesof the office of, or to act as, Chairman........................................................89
185.The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while aresolution for his removal from office is under consideration.............89
186.Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.................................................................90
187.Secretariat of State Legislature......................................................................90
Conduct of Business188.Oath or affirmation by members..................................................................90
189.Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies
and quorum.........................................................................................................90-91Disqualifications of Members190.Vacation of seats
................................................................................................91-92191.Disqualifications for membership.................................................................92-93192.Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members...................93
193.Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation underarticle 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified..........................93-94Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures and their Members194.Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of themembers and committees thereof.................................................................94
195.Salaries and allowances of members...........................................................94-95Contents(viii) 


 Legislative ProcedureARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES196.Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills..................................95
197.Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other thanMoney Bills...........................................................................................................95-96198.Special procedure in respect of Money Bills
..............................................96-97199.Definition of ﬁMoney Billsﬂ............................................................................97-98200.Assent to Bills....
.................................................................................................98-99201.Bills reserved for consideration...
...................................................................99
Procedure in Financial Matters202.Annual financial statement
............................................................................99-100203.Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.................................100-101204.Appropriation Bills...........................................................................................101
205.Supplementary, additional or excess grants
.............................................101-102206.Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.....................
102-103  207.
Special provisions as to financial Bills........................................................103
Procedure Generally208.Rules of procedure.............................................................................................103-104209.Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State inrelation to financial business..........................................................................104
210.Language to be used in the Legislature......................................................104-105211.Restriction on discussion in the Legislature..............................................105
212.Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.....................105
CHAPTER IV.ŠL
EGISLATIVE
 POWER OF THE GOVERNOR213.Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess ofLegislature...........................................................................................................105-107CHAPTER V.ŠT
HE HIGH COURTS
 IN THE STATES
214.High Courts for States......................................................................................107
215.High Courts to be courts of record...............................................................107
216.Constitution of High Courts...........................................................................107
217.Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High Court........108-109218.Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to HighCourts....................................................................................................................109
219.Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts........................................110
220.Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge..........................110
221.Salaries, etc., of Judges....................................................................................110
222.Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another
..............................1
10-111
223.Appointment of acting Chief Justice...........................................................111
224.Appointment of additional and acting Judges
........................................111
224A.Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts...................111-112
225.Jurisdiction of existing High Courts............................................................112
226.Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.............................................1
12-114
226A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................114
227.Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court...............1
14-115
Contents(ix) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES228.Transfer of certain cases to High Court
.......................................................115
228A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................115
229.Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.......................1
15-116
230.Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories
..............116
231.Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States........1
16-117
CHAPTER VI.ŠS
UBORDINATE
 COURTS
233.Appointment of district judges.....................................................................117
233A.Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by,
certain district judges.......................................................................................1
17-118
234.Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicialservice....................................................................................................................118
235.Control over subordinate courts....................................................................118
236.Interpretation.......................................................................................................1
18-119
237.Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class orclasses of magistrates.......................................................................................119
PART VII
THE STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
238.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................120
PART VIII
THE UNION TERRITORIES239.Administration of Union territories.............................................................121
239A.Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both forcertain Union territories...................................................................................121
239AA.Special provisions with respect to Delhi.....................................................121-124239AB.Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery........................124-125239B.Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess ofLegislature............................................................................................................125-126240.Power of President to make regulations for certain Unionterritories...............................................................................................................126-127241.High Courts for Union territories..................................................................127-128242.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................128
PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243.Definitions............................................................................................................129
243A.Gram Sabha.........................................................................................................129
243B.Constitution of Panchayats............................................................................129-130243C.Composition of Panchayats...........................................................................130-131243D.Reservation of seats...........................................................................................131-132243E.Duration of Panchayats, etc...........................................................................132-133243F.
Disqualifications for membership.................................................................133
243G.Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats...........................133-134243H.Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats
..................134
Contents(x) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES243-I.Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position.....
134-135243J.Audit of accounts of Pachayats....................................................................135
243K.Elections to the Panchayats............................................................................135-136243L.Application to Union  territories
...................................................................136
243M.Part not to apply to certain areas.................................................................136-137243N.Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.........................................137-138243-O.Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.....................................138
PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P.
Definitions............................................................................................................139
243Q.Constitution of Municipalities.......................................................................139-140 243R.
Composition of Municipalities...
...................................................................
140-141243S.Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.
..................141
243T.
Reservation of seats...........................................................................................141-142243U.Duration of Municipalities, etc......................................................................142-143243V.
Disqualifications for membership.................................................................143
243W.Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc..............143-144243X.Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities
...............144
243Y.
Finance Commission.........................................................................................144-145243Z.Audit of accounts of Municipalities............................................................145
243ZA.Elections to the Municipalities.......................................................................145
243ZB.Application to Union territories....................................................................145-146243ZC.Part not to apply to certain areas.................................................................146
243ZD.Committee for district planning....................................................................146-147243ZE.Committee for Metropolitan planning........................................................147-148243ZF.
Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities....................................149
243ZG.Bar to interference by Courts in electoral matters
....................................149
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS244.Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas
...........................150
244A.Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal areas inAssam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or
both therefor.........................................................................................................150-151PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.ŠL
EGISLATIVE
 RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers245.Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.........152
246.Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislaturesof States................................................................................................................152
Contents(xi) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES247.Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certainadditional courts................................................................................................153
248.Residuary powers of legislation....................................................................153
249.Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the StateList in the national interest..............................................................................153
250.Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in theState List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation....................154
251.Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States..........................154
252.Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent andadoption of such legislation by any other State.......................................154-155253.Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.......................155
254.Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws madeby the Legislatures of States...........................................................................155
255.Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to beregarded as matters of procedure only.......................................................156
CHAPTER II.ŠA
DMINISTRATIVE
 RELATIONS
General256.Obligation of States and the Union..............................................................156
257.Control of the Union over States in certain cases.....................................156-157257A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................157258.Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases............157-158258A.Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union...........................158
259.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................158260.Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.........158
261.Public acts, records and judicial proceedings...........................................158-159Disputes relating to Waters262.Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of  inter-State
rivers or river valleys.........................................................................................159
Co-ordination between States263.Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council....................................159
PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I.ŠF
INANCEGeneral264.Interpretation.......................................................................................................160
265.Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law
..................................160
266.Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States.....160
Contents(xii) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES267.Contingency Fund..............................................................................................161
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States268.Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the
States.....................................................................................................................161-162268A.Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by the
Union and the States.........................................................................................162
269.Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States.......
162-163270.Taxes levied and  distributed between the Union and the States
.......163
271.Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union...........164
272.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................164
273.Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.......................164
274.Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affectingtaxation in which States are interested........................................................164-165275.Grants from the Union to certain States.....................................................165-166276.Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.....................167
277.Savings..................................................................................................................167
278.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................167
279.Calculation of  ﬁnet proceedsﬂ, etc.
.............................................................168
280.Finance Commission.........................................................................................168-169281.Recommendations of the Finance Commission........................................169
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions282.Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues......169
283.Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and
moneys credited to the public accounts.....................................................169-170284.Custody of suitors™  deposits and other moneys received by public
servants and courts...........................................................................................170
285.Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.....................170
286.Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods...171
287.Exemption from taxes on electricity
............................................................171-172288.Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricityin certain cases....................................................................................................172
289.Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation......
172-173290.Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.....................173
290A.Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.........................................173-174291.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................174
CHAPTER II.ŠB
ORROWING292.Borrowing by the Government of India.......................................................174
293.Borrowing by States..........................................................................................174-175CHAPTER III.ŠP
ROPERTY
, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS,LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS
 AND SUITS294.Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in
certain cases.........................................................................................................175
Contents(xiii) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES295.Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in
other cases............................................................................................................175-176296.Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.....................
176297.Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf andresources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union...........177
298.Power to carry on trade, etc............................................................................177
299.Contracts..............................................................................................................
177-178300.Suits and proceedings......................................................................................178
CHAPTER IV.ŠR
IGHT TO PROPERTY
300A.Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law......178
PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THETERRITORY OF INDIA301.Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse...........................................179
302.Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce andintercourse............................................................................................................179
303.Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the Stateswith regard to trade and commerce.............................................................179
304.Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among States.........179-180305.Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies.....180
306.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................180
307.Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles301 to 304.............................................................................................................180
PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.ŠS
ERVICES308.Interpretation.......................................................................................................181
309.Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Unionor a State...............................................................................................................181
310.Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State
.......................181-182311.Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed incivil capacities under the Union or a State................................................182-183312.All-India services...............................................................................................183-184312A.Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service ofofficers of certain services................................................................................184-185313.Transitional provisions
.....................................................................................185
314.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................185
CHAPTER II.ŠP
UBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS315.Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.............185-186316.Appointment and term of office of members...........................................186-187Contents(xiv) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES317.Removal and suspension of a member of a Public ServiceCommission.........................................................................................................187-188318.Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of membersand staff of the Commission..........................................................................189
319.Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commissionon ceasing to be such members...
...................................................................
189-190320.Functions of Public Service Commissions
..................................................190-192321.Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions..................192
322.Expenses of Public Service Commissions...................................................192
323.Reports of Public Service Commissions......................................................192
PART XIVA
TRIBUNALS323A.Administrative tribunals.................................................................................193-194323B.Tribunals for other matters
.............................................................................194-196PART XV
ELECTIONS324.Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vestedin an Election Commission..............................................................................197-198325.No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in aspecial, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex.......................198
326.Elections to the House of the People and to the LegislativeAssemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage....................198
327.Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to electionsto Legislatures....................................................................................................199
328.Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect toelections to such Legislature...........................................................................199
329.Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.....................................199
329A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................199
PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330.Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
 in the House of the People
.............................................................................200-201331.Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House ofthe People.............................................................................................................201
332.Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and ScheduledTribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States
....................................201-203333.Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the LegislativeAssemblies of the States..................................................................................203
334.Reservation of seats and special representation to cease aftersixty years............................................................................................................203
335.Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services
and posts..............................................................................................................204
336.Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services.........204
Contents(xv) 


 ARTICLES...........................................................................................................PAGES337.Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefitof Anglo-Indian Community.........................................................................204-205338.National Commission for Scheduled Castes
.............................................205-207338A.National Commission for Scheduled Tribes
..............................................207-209339.Control of the Union over the Administration of Scheduled Areasand the welfare of Scheduled Tribes
............................................................209-210340.Appointment of  a Commission to investigate the conditions of
backward classes...............................................................................................210
341.Scheduled Castes...............................................................................................210-211
342.Scheduled Tribes
................................................................................................211
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGECHAPTER I.ŠL
ANGUAGE OF THE UNION343.Official language of the Union.......................................................................212
344.Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.......212-214CHAPTER II.ŠR
EGIONAL LANGUAGES345.Official language or languages of a State..................................................214
346.Official language for communication between one State andanother or between a State and the Union..................................................214
347.Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of thepopulation of a State........................................................................................214
CHAPTER III.ŠL
ANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT
, HIGH COURTS
, ETC.348.Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the HighCourts and for Acts, Bills, etc........................................................................214-215349.Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating tolanguage...............................................................................................................216
CHAPTER IV.ŠS
PECIAL DIRECTIVES350.Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.................216
350A.Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage................216
350B.Special Officer for linguistic minorities.......................................................216
351.Directive for development of the Hindi language....................................216-217PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS352.Proclamation of Emergency............................................................................218-220353.Effect of Proclamation of Emergency..........................................................221
354.Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues while aProclamation of Emergency is in operation...............................................221-222355.Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggressionand internal disturbance..................................................................................222
356.Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in States..........
222-225Contents(xvi) 


 ARTICLES..................................................................................................................PAGES357.Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued underarticle 356.............................................................................................................225-226 358.
Suspension  of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.
................226-227359.Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part IIIduring emergencies............................................................................................227-228359A.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................228
360.Provisions as to financial emergency...........................................................228-230PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS361.Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs....................231-232361A.Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and StateLegislatures..........................................................................................................232
361B.Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post......232-233362.[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................233
363.Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain treaties,agreements, etc...................................................................................................233
363A.Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and privypurses to be abolished......................................................................................234
364.Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes...........................234
365.Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions givenby the Union.........................................................................................................235
366.Definitions............................................................................................................235-239367.Interpretation.......................................................................................................239
PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION368.Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor.....
240-241PART XXI
TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
369.Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain
matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent List........242
370.Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir
....243-244371.Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat....244-245371A.Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.......................245-249371B.Special provision with respect to the State of Assam............................250
371C.Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.........................250
371D.Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh........251-255371E.Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh
......................255
371F.
Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim..........................255-259371G.Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram........................259
371H.Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.....
259-260Contents(xvii) 


 ARTICLES..................................................................................................................PAGES371-I.Special provision with respect to the State of  Goa
.................................260
372.Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.................260-262372A.Power of the President to adapt laws.........................................................262
373.Power of President to make order in respect of persons underpreventive detention in certain cases............................................................262-263374.Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings pendingin the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council...........................263-264375.Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to theprovisions of the Constitution.......................................................................264
376.Provisions as to Judges of High Courts......................................................264-265377.Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India................265
378.Provisions as to Public Service Commissions...........................................265
378A.Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh LegislativeAssembly..............................................................................................................266
379-391. [Repealed.]............................................................................................................
266392.Power of the President to remove difficulties...........................................266
PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, AUTHORITATIVE
TEXT IN HINDI AND REPEALS393.Short title..............................................................................................................267
394.Commencement..................................................................................................267
394A.Authoritative text in the Hindi language...................................................267-268395.Repeals..................................................................................................................268
SCHEDULESFIRST SCHEDULEI.The States
.............................................................................................................269-274II.The Union territories
..........................................................................................274-275SECOND SCHEDULEPart AŠProvisions as to the President and the Governors of States
..................276
Part BŠ[Repealed.]..............................................................................................................276
Part CŠProvisions as to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House
of the People and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the

Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman
of the Legislative Council of a State............................................................277
Part DŠProvisions as to the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High
Courts....................................................................................................................277-280Part EŠProvisions as to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
........281
THIRD  SCHEDULE
Š Forms of Oaths or Affirmations...........................................282-284Contents(xviii) 


 ARTICLES..................................................................................................................PAGESFOURTH  SCHEDULEŠ
Allocation of seats in the Council of States...................285-286FIFTH SCHEDULEŠProvisions  as  to  the  Administration  and  Control  of
                   Scheduled  Areas and Scheduled Tribes
..............................287
      Part AŠGeneral................................................................................................................287
      Part BŠAdministration and  Control of Scheduled Areas and Scheduled
   Tribes
..................................................................................................................287-289      Part CŠ Scheduled Areas
.............................................................................................289-290      Part DŠAmendment of the Schedule........................................................................290
SIXTH SCHEDULEŠProvisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the
              States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
.............291-314SEVENTH SCHEDULEŠList I ŠUnion List........................................................................................................315-321List IIŠState List..........................................................................................................321-326List IIIŠConcurrent List............................................................................................326-329EIGHTH SCHEDULEŠLanguages..................................................................................330
NINTH SCHEDULEŠValidation of certain Acts and Regulations
........................331-348TENTH SCHEDULEŠProvisions as to disqualification on ground of defection.........349-353ELEVENTH SCHEDULEŠPowers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.....
354-355TWELFTH SCHEDULEŠPowers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities,                           etc...........................................................................................356
APPENDIXAPPENDIX  IŠ
The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order,
       
    
 1954
.........................................................................................................357-374APPENDIX IIŠRe-statement,   with   reference  to  the   present   text   of   the
Constitution, of the exceptions and modifications subject towhich the Constitution applies  to the State of Jammu and

Kashmir..................................................................................................375-396INDEX........................................................................................................................................397-443Contents(xix)


  


 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIAWE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnlyresolved to constitute India into a 1[SOVEREIGNSOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and

to secure to all its citizens:JUSTICE, social, economic and political;LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith andworship;EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;and to promote among them allFRATERNITY assuring the 
dignity of the individualand the 2[unity and integrity of the Nation];IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY 
this twenty-sixth day of Novembe
r, 1949, do 
HEREBY ADOPT,
ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS

CONSTITUTION.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for ﬁSOVEREIGNDEMOCRATIC REPUBLICﬂ 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ﬁunity of the Nationﬂ (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
Preamble. 


 PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.1[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be asspecified in the First Schedule.](3) The territory of India shall compriseŠ(a) the territories of the States;2[(b) the Union territories specified in the FirstSchedule; and](c) such other territories as may be acquired.2. Parliament may by law admit into the Union, orestablish, new States on such terms and conditions as it
thinks fit.32A. [Sikkim to be associated with the Union.] Rep. by theConstitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, 
s. 5 (
w.e.f.
26-4-1975).3. Parliament may by lawŠ(a) form a new State by separation of territoryfrom any State or by uniting two or more States or
parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of
any State;(b) increase the area of any State;(c) diminish the area of any State;(d) alter the boundaries of any State;(e) alter the name of any State:4[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall beintroduced in either House of Parliament except on the
recommendation of the President and unless, where the
proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundariesName and territory
of the Union.Admission orestablishment of
new States.Formation of new
States and
alteration of areas,
boundaries or
names of existing
States.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for cl. (2).2Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-clause (b).3Article 2A was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f.
1-3-1975).4Subs. by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 2, for the proviso.2 


 or name of any of the States 1***, the Bill has been referredby the President to the Legislature of that State for
expressing its views thereon within such period as may
be specified in the reference or within such further period
as the President may allow and the period so specified or
allowed has expired.]2[Explanation I.ŠIn this article, in clauses 
(a) to 
(e),"State'' includes a Union territory, but in the proviso,

"State'' does not include a Union territory.
Explanation II.ŠThe power conferred on Parliamentby clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or
Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union
territory to any other State or Union territory.]
4. (1) Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall
contain such provisions for the amendment of the First
Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary
to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to representation in
Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the
State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may
deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to bean amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part I.ŠThe Union and its territory.ŠArts. 3-4.)
Laws made underarticles 2 and 3 to
provide for the

amendment of the
First and the
Fourth Schedules
and supplemental,
incidental and
consequential
matters.1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.3 


 PART II
CITIZENSHIP5. At the commencement of this Constitution, everyperson who has his domicile in the territory of India
andŠ(a) who was born in the territory of India; or(b) either of whose parents was born in the territoryof India; or(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territoryof India for not less than five years immediately
preceding such commencement,shall be a citizen of India.6. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person
who has migrated to the territory of India from the
territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be
a citizen of India at the commencement of this
Constitution ifŠ(a) he or either of his parents or any of hisgrandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted);
and(b) (i) in the case where such person has somigrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he

has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India
since the date of his migration, or(ii) in the case where such person has so migratedon or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has

been registered as a citizen of India by an officer
appointed in that behalf by the Government of the
Dominion of India on an application made by him
therefor to such officer before the commencement of
this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed
by that Government: Provided that no person shall be so registered unlesshe has been resident in the territory of India for at least
six months immediately preceding the date of his
application.Citizenship at the
commencement of
the Constitution.Rights ofcitizenship of
certain persons
who have migrated
to India from
Pakistan.4 


  7. Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a
person who has after the first day of March, 1947,
migrated from the territory of India to the territory now
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen
of India:Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to aperson who, after having so migrated to the territory now
included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India
under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued
by or under the authority of any law and every such
person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 bedeemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the
nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person
who or either of whose parents or any of whose
grandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted),
and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside
India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of
India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the
country where he is for the time being residing on an
application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or
consular representative, whether before or after the
commencement of this Constitution, in the form and

manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of
India or the Government of India.
9. No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of
article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue

of article 6 or article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of any foreign State.10. Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen
of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may
be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part
shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make
any provision with respect to the acquisition and
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating
to citizenship.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part II.ŠCitizenship.ŠArts. 7Š11.)
Rights ofcitizenship of
certain persons of
Indian origin
residing outside
India.5Rights of
citizenship of
certain migrants to
Pakistan.Persons voluntarilyacquiring
citizenship of a
foreign State not to
be citizens.Continuance of therights of
citizenship.Parliament toregulate the right
of citizenship by
law.
 


 PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General12. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,ﬁthe State™™ includes the Government and Parliament of

India and the Government and the Legislature of each of
the States and all local or other authorities within the
territory of India or under the control of the Government
of India.
13. (1) All laws in force in the territory of Indiaimmediately before the commencement of this Constitution,

in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this

Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away
or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law
made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of
the contravention, be void.(3) In this article, unless the context otherwiserequires,Š(a) ﬁlawﬂ includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law,
rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having
in the territory of India the force of law;(b) ﬁlaws in forceﬂ includes laws passed or made bya Legislature or other competent authority in the
territory of India before the commencement of this
Constitution and not previously repealed,
notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof
may not be then in operation either at all or in
particular areas.1[(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to anyamendment of this Constitution made under article 368.]Right to Equality14. The State shall not deny to any person equalitybefore the law or the equal protection of the laws within the
territory of India.Definition.Laws inconsistentwith or in
derogation of the
fundamental rights.6Equality before
law.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2.
 


 15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against anycitizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place
of birth or any of them.(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to anydisability, liability, restriction or condition with regard toŠ
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels andplaces of public entertainment; or(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roadsand places of public resort maintained wholly or
partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use ofthe general public.(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State frommaking any special provision for women and children.1[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29shall prevent the State from making any special provisionfor the advancement of any socially and educationallybackward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.]
2[(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) ofclause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making
any special provision, by law, for the advancement of
any socially and educationally backward classes ofcitizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including privateeducational institutions, whether aided or unaided by
the State, other than the minority educational institutionsreferred to in clause (1) of article 30.]
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for allcitizens in matters relating to employment or appointmentto any office under the State.(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any ofthem, be ineligible for, or 
discriminated against in respect
of, any employment or office under the State.(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliamentfrom making any law prescribing, in regard to a class orclasses of employment or appointment to an office
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 15-16.)
Prohibition ofdiscrimination on
grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or place
of birth.7Equality of
opportunity in
matters of public
employment.1Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 2.2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-1-2006).
 


 1[under the Government of, or any local or other authority
within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union territory] prior tosuch employment or appointment.(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State frommaking any provision for the reservation of appointments
or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which,
in the opinion of the State, is not adequately representedin the services under the State.2[(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the Statefrom making any provision for reservation 3[in mattersof promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class]

or classes of posts in the services under the State in favourof the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which,
in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented
in the services under the State.]4[(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the Statefrom considering any unfilled vacancies of a year whichare reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance
with any provision for reservation made under clause (4)or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filledup in any succeeding year or years and such class of
vacancies shall not be considered together with thevacancies of the year in which they are being filled up fordetermining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on
total number of vacancies of that year.]
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation ofany law which provides that the incumbent of an officein connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the
governing body thereof shall be a person professing aparticular religion or belonging to a particular
denomination.17. ﬁUntouchabilityﬂ is abolished and its practice in
any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disabilityarising out of ﬁUntouchabilityﬂ shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.
18. (1) No title, not being a military or academic
distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from anyforeign State.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 16Š18.)
81Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ﬁunder
any State specified in the First Schedule or any local or other authority within its territory, any

requirement as to residence within that Stateﬂ.2Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2.
3Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for certain words(w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
4Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
Abolition ofUntouchability.
Abolition of titles. 


 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 18-19.)
9(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall,while he holds any office of profit or trust under theState, accept without the consent of the President anytitle from any foreign State.(4)  No person holding any office of profit or trust
under the State shall, without the consent of the President,
accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind
from or under any foreign State.Right to Freedom19. (1) All citizens shall have the rightŠ(a) to freedom of speech and expression;(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;(c) to form associations or unions;(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territoryof India;  1[and]       2*                       *                      *                      *                      *
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on anyoccupation, trade or business.3[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affectthe operation of any existing law, or prevent the State

from making any law, in so far as such law imposes
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rightconferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of 4[thesovereignty and integrity of India,] the security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,

decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court,

defamation or incitement to an offence.](3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shallaffect the operation of any existing law in so far as itimposes, or prevent the State from making any lawimposing, in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrityof India or] public order, reasonable restrictions on the

exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shallaffect the operation of any existing law in so far as itimposes, or prevent the State from making any lawimposing, in the interests of 
4[the sovereignty and
Protection of
certain rights
regarding freedom
of speech, etc.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Sub-clause (f) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for cl. (2) (with retrospectiveeffect).4Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2.
 


 integrity of India or] public order or morality, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by thesaid sub-clause.(5) Nothing in 1[sub-clauses (d) and (e)] of the saidclause shall affect the operation of any existing law in sofar as it imposes, or prevent the State from making anylaw imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of
any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses eitherin the interests of the general public or for the protectionof the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shallaffect the operation of any existing law in so far as itimposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonablerestrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by thesaid sub-clause, and, in particular, 
2[nothing in the saidsub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing lawin so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from makingany law relating to,Š(i) the professional or technical qualificationsnecessary for practising any profession or carrying onany occupation, trade or business, or(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporationowned or controlled by the State, of any trade,business, industry or service, whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens orotherwise].20. (1) No person shall be convicted of any offence
except for violation of a law in force at the time of thecommission of the Act charged as an offence, nor besubjected to a penalty greater than that which might have
been inflicted under the law in force at the time of thecommission of the offence.(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished forthe same offence more than once.(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelledto be a witness against himself.21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to procedure established by law.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 19Š21.)
101Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2, for ﬂsub-clauses(d), (e) and (f)ﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for certain words.Protection inrespect of
conviction for
offences.Protection of lifeand personal
liberty.
 


 *[21A. The State  shall provide free and compulsory
education to all children of the age of six to fourteen yearsin such manner as the State may, by law, determine.]
22. (1) No person who is arrested shall be detained incustody without being informed, as soon as may be, of thegrounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right toconsult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his

choice.(2) Every person who is arrested and detained incustody shall be produced before the nearest magistratewithin a period of twenty-four hours of such arrestexcluding the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no suchperson shall be detained in custody beyond the saidperiod without the authority of a magistrate.(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall applyŠ(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemyalien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained underany law providing for preventive detention.**(4) No law providing for preventive detention shallauthorise the detention of a person for a longer periodthan three months unlessŠ(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons whoare, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 21A-22.)
11*Ins by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2  (which is not yet in force, dateto be notified later on).**Cl. (4) shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 3(which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on) asŠﬁ(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of aperson for a longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted inacordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate Hight Courthas reported before the expiration of the said period of two months that there is in its
opinion sufficient cause for such detention:Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than twoother members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High
Court and the other menbers shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court:Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of anyperson beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under
sub-clause (a) of clause (7).Explanation.ŠIn this clause, ﬁappropriate High Courtﬂ means,Š(i) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the Government of India or an officer or authority subordinate to that Government,the High Court for the Union territory of Delhi;(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detentionmade by the Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court forthe State; and(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate tosuch administrator, such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by
Parliament in this behalf.ﬂRight to education.Protection against
arrest and
detention in
certain cases. 


 as, Judges of a High Court has reported before theexpiration of the said period of three months that there
is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shallauthorise the detention of any person beyond the
maximum period prescribed by any law made by
Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or(b) such person is detained in accordance with theprovisions of any law made by Parliament under sub-
clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of anorder made under any law providing for preventive

detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon
as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on
which the order has been made and shall afford him the
earliest opportunity of making a representation against
the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authoritymaking any such order as is referred to in that clause to
disclose facts which such authority considers to be against
the public interest to disclose.(7) Parliament may by law prescribeŠ*(a)  the circumstances under which, and the class
or classes of cases in which, a person may be detained
for a period longer than three months under any law
providing for preventive detention without obtaining
the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4);**(b) the maximum period for which any personmay in any class or classes of cases be detained under
any law providing for preventive detention; and(c) the procedure to be followed by an AdvisoryBoard in an inquiry under ***[sub-clause (a) of clause(4)].THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArt. 22.)
12*Sub-clause (a) shall stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,1978, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).
**Sub-clause (b) shall stand relettered as sub-clause (a) by s. 3, ibid. (which is yet not inforce, date to be notified later on).***The words, letter and figure in brackets shall stand substituted as ﬁclause (4)ﬂ bys. 3, 
ibid. (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).
 


 Right against Exploitation23. (1) Traffic in human beings and
 begar 
and othersimilar forms of forced labour are prohibited and anycontravention of this provision shall be an offencepunishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State fromimposing compulsory service for public purposes, and in
imposing such service the State shall not make any
discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or
class or any of them.
24. No child below the age of fourteen years shall be
employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in
any other hazardous employment.Right to Freedom of Religion25. (1) Subject to public order, morality and health
and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are
equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operationof any existing law or prevent the State from makingany lawŠ(a)  regulating or restricting any economic, financial,
political or other secular activity which may be
associated with religious practice;(b) providing for social welfare and reform or thethrowing open of Hindu religious institutions of a
public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.Explanation I.ŠThe wearing and carrying of kirpansshall be deemed to be included in the profession of the
Sikh religion.Explanation II.ŠIn sub-clause (b) of clause (2), thereference to Hindus shall be construed as including a
reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina orBuddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religiousinstitutions shall be construed accordingly.
26. Subject to public order, morality and health, every
religious denomination or any section thereof shall have
the rightŠ(a) to establish and maintain institutions forreligious and charitable purposes;(b)  to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
Prohibition ofemployment of
children in
factories, etc.Freedom ofconscience and free
profession, practice
and propagation of
religion.Prohibition oftraffic in human
beings and forced
labour.
Freedom tomanage religious
affairs.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 23Š26.)
13 


 (c) to own and acquire movable and immovable
property; and(d) to administer such property in accordance withlaw.
27. No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes,
the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated inpayment of expenses for the promotion or maintenanceof any particular religion or religious denomination.28. (1) No religious instruction shall be provided in
any educational institution wholly maintained out of State
funds.(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educationalinstitution which is administered by the State but hasbeen established under any endowment or trust whichrequires that religious instruction shall be imparted in
such institution.(3) No person attending any educational institutionrecognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds
shall be required to take part in any religious instruction
that may be imparted in such institution or to attend anyreligious worship that may be conducted in such
institution or in any premises attached thereto unless suchperson or, if such person is a minor, his guardian has
given his consent thereto.Cultural and Educational Rights29. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own shall have the rightto conserve the same.(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into anyeducational institution maintained by the State orreceiving aid out of State funds on grounds only ofreligion, race, caste, language or any of them.30. (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or
language, shall have the right to establish and administereducational institutions of their choice.1[(1A) In making any law providing for thecompulsory acquisition of any property of an educationalinstitution established and administered by a minority,
Freedom as topayment of taxes
for promotion of
any particular
religion.Freedom as toattendance at
religious
instruction or
religious worship

in certain
educational
institutions.Protection ofinterests of
minorities.Right of minoritiesto establish and
administer
educational
institutions.1Ins. by  the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.  4 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 26Š30.)
14 


 referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that theamount fixed by or determined under such law for the
acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict
or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.](2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educationalinstitutions, discriminate against any educational
institution on the ground that it is under the management
of a minority, whether based on religion or language.
1*      *      *
31. [Compulsory acquisition of property.] Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (
w.e.f.
20-6-1979). 2[Saving of Certain Laws]3[31A.  4[(1)  Notwithstanding  anything contained in
article 13, no law providing forŠ(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of
any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights, or(b) the taking over of the management of anyproperty by the State for a limited period either in
the public interest or in order to secure the proper
management of the property, or
(c) the amalgamation of two or more corporationseither in the public interest or in order to secure the
proper management of any of the corporations,
or(d) the extinguishment or modification of anyrights of managing agents, secretaries and treasurers,
managing directors, directors or managers of
corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
thereof, orSaving of laws
providing for
acquisition of
estates, etc.1The sub-heading ﬁRight to Propertyﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourthAmendment) Act,  1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 4 (with retrospective effect).4Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3, for cl. (1) (withretrospective effect).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 30Š31
A.)15 


 (e) the extinguishment or modification of anyrights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or

licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning,

any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature
termination or cancellation of any such agreement,
lease or licence,shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it isinconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by 
1[article 14 or article 19]:Provided that where such law is a law made by theLegislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall
not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved

for the consideration of the President, has received his
assent:]2[Provided further that where any law makes anyprovision for the acquisition by the State of any estate
and where any land comprised therein is held by a person
under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful forthe State to acquire any portion of such land as is withinthe ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the
time being in force or any building or structure standing
thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating
to the acquisition of such land, building or structure,
provides for payment of compensation at a rate which
shall not be less than the market value thereof.]  (2) In this article,Š
3[(a) the expression ''estate'' shall, in relation toany local area, have the same meaning as that
expression or its local equivalent has in the existing
law relating to land tenures in force in that area and
shall also includeŠ(i)  any 
jagir, inam 
or muafi or other similar grant
and in the States of 
 4[Tamil Nadu] and Kerala,
any janmam right;
1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 7, for  ﬁarticle 14,
article 19 or article 31ﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, s. 2.3Subs. by  s. 2, 
ibid., for sub-clause (a) (with retrospective effect).4Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968),  s. 4, for
ﬁMadrasﬂ. (w.e..f.  14-1-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArt. 31A.)16 


 (ii)  any land held under ryotwari settlement;
(iii) any land held or let for purposes ofagriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto,
including waste land, forest land, land for pasture
or sites of buildings and other structures occupied
by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and
village artisans;](b) the expression ''rights'', in relation to an estate,shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-

proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-holder, 
1[raiyat,under-raiyat] or other intermediary and any rights orprivileges in respect of land revenue.]2[31B. Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions contained in article 31A, none of the Acts and
Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of
the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void,
or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act,
Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takesaway or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any
provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding any
judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the

contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall,

subject to the power of any competent Legislature to
repeal or amend it, continue in force.] 3[31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in article
13, no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards
securing  4[all or any of the principles laid down in PartIV] shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is
inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by 5[article 14 or article 19];  6and no lawValidation of

certain Acts and

Regulations.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3 (with retrospective effect).2Ins. by  the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 5.
3Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-4-1972).
4Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 4, for ﬁthe principles
specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39ﬂ (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Section 4 has been declared
invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and others 
vs. Union of India and others
(1980) 2. S.C.C. 591.5Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,  s. 8,  for ﬁarticle 14,
article 19 or article 31ﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6In Kesavananda Bharati 
vs. The State of Kerala, (1973) Supp. S.C.R. 1, the Supreme Courtheld the provisions in italics to be invalid.Saving of laws
giving effect to
certain directive
principles.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 31
AŠ31C.)17 


 containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such
policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground
that it does not give effect to such policy:Provided that where such law is made by theLegislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall not
apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for

the consideration of the President, has received his assent.  131D. [Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.]Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977,
s. 2 (
w.e.f.
 13-4-1978).
Right to Constitutional Remedies32. (1) The right to move the Supreme Court byappropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights
conferred by this Part is guaranteed.(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issuedirections or orders or writs, including writs in the nature
of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto
 and
certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for theenforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the
Supreme Court by clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by
law empower any other court to exercise within the local
limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable
by the Supreme Court under clause (2).(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be
suspended except as otherwise provided for by this

Constitution.232A. [Constitutional validity of State laws not to beconsidered in proceedings under article 32.] 
Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s.
 3 (
w.e.f.
13-4-1978).Remedies for
enforcement of
rights conferred by
this Part.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f.  3-1-1977).
2Ins. by s. 6, 
ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 31
CŠ32A.)18 


 1[33. Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent
any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their
application to,Š(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or(b) the members of the Forces charged with themaintenance of public order; or(c) persons employed in any bureau or otherorganisation established by the State for purposes of
intelligence or counter intelligence; or(d) person employed in, or in connection with,
the telecommunication systems set up for the
purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
referred to in clauses (a) to (c),be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the properdischarge of their duties and the maintenance of
discipline among them.]34. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify
any person in the service of the Union or of a State or
any other person in respect of any act done by him in
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order
in any area within the territory of India where martial
law was in force or validate any sentence passed,
punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done
under martial law in such area.35. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,Š
(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature ofa State shall not have, power to make lawsŠ(i) with respect to any of the matters whichunder clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article
32, article 33 and article 34 may be provided for
by law made by Parliament; and(ii) for prescribing punishment for those actswhich are declared to be offences under this Part;Power of
Parliament to
modify the rights
conferred by this

Part in their
application to
Forces, etc.Restriction onrights conferred by

this Part while
martial law is in
force in any area.Legislation to giveeffect to the
provisions of this
Part.1Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, 1984,  s. 2, for art. 33.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArts. 33Š35.)
19 


 and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after thecommencement of this Constitution, make laws
for prescribing punishment for the acts referred
to in sub-clause (ii);(b) any law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution in the territory
of India with respect to any of the matters referred to
in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing forpunishment for any act referred to in sub-clause (ii)of that clause shall, subject to the terms thereof and
to any adaptations and modifications that may be
made therein under article 372, continue in force until
altered or repealed or amended by Parliament.Explanation.ŠIn this article, the expression ﬁlaw inforceﬂ has the same meaning as in article 372.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part III.ŠFundamental Rights.ŠArt. 35.)
20 


 PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
36. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,ﬁthe Stateﬂ has the same meaning as in Part III.37. The provisions contained in this Part shall not be
enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid
down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of

the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply
these principles in making laws.38. 1[(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfareof the people by securing and protecting as effectively as
it may a social order in which justice, social, economic
and political, shall inform all the institutions of the
national life.2[(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise
the inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not
only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of
people residing in different areas or engaged in different
vocations.]39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy
towards securingŠ(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have
the right to an adequate means of livelihood;(b) that the ownership and control of the materialresources of the community are so distributed as best
to subserve the common good;(c) that the operation of the economic system doesnot result in the concentration of wealth and means
of production to the common detriment;(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for bothmen and women;Definition.Application of theprinciples
contained in this
Part.State to secure asocial order for
the promotion of
welfare of the
people.Certain principlesof policy to be
followed by the
State.1Art. 38 renumbered as cl. (1) thereof by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)Act, 1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f 20-6-1979).
21 


 (e) that the health and strength of workers, menand women, and the tender age of children are not
abused and that citizens are not forced by economic
necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or
strength;1[(f) that children are given opportunities andfacilities to develop in a healthy manner and in
conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood
and youth are protected against exploitation and
against moral and material abandonment.]2[39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the
legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal
opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal

aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are

not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities.]40. The State shall take steps to organise village
panchayats and endow them with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function
as units of self-government.41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic
capacity and development, make effective provision for
securing the right to work, to education and to public
assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness
and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
42. The State shall make provision for securing just
and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.43. The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitablelegislation or economic organisation or in any other way,

to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work,
a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. (
f) (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).2Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f.  3-1-1977).
Equal justice andfree legal aid.Organisation ofvillage panchayats.Right to work, toeducation and to
public assistance
in certain cases.Provision for justand humane
conditions of work
and maternity
relief.Living wage, etc.,for workers.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IV.
ŠDirective Principles of State Policy.
ŠArts. 39Š43.)
22 


 standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and socialand cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State

shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an
individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.1[43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislationor in any other way, to secure the participation of workers

in the management of undertakings, establishments or
other organisations engaged in any industry.]
44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizensa uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.*[45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a
period of ten years from the commencement of this

Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all
children until they complete the age of fourteen years.]46. The State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections
of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes

and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from

social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
47. The State shall regard the raising of the level of
nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the
improvement of public health as among its primary
duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to

bring about prohibition of the consumption except for
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs
which are injurious to health.48. The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines
and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and

improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of

cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.Participation of
workers in
management of
industries.Uniform civil codefor the citizens.Provision for freeand compulsory
education for
children.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
*Art. 45 shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act,2002, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on) asŠﬁ45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the
age of six years.ŠThe State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and educationfor all children until they complete the age of six years.ﬂ.
Promotion of
educational and
economic interests
of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other

weaker sections.Duty of the State
to raise the level
of nutrition and
the standard of
living and to
improve public
health.Organisation ofagriculture and
animal husbandry.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IV.
ŠDirective Principles of State Policy.
ŠArts. 43Š48A.)23 


 Protection andimprovement of
environment and
safeguarding of
forests and wild
life.1[48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and
improve the environment and to safeguard the forests
and wild life of the country.]
49. It shall be the obligation of the State to protect
every monument or place or object of artistic or historic

interest,  2[declared by or under law made by Parliament]to be of national importance, from spoliation,
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export,
as the case may be.50. The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary
from the executive in the public services of the State.51. The State shall endeavour toŠ
(a) promote international peace and security;
(b) maintain just and honourable relations betweennations;(c) foster respect for international law and treatyobligations in the dealings of organized peoples with
one another; and(d) encourage settlement of international disputesby arbitration.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).2Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ﬁdeclared by
Parliament by lawﬂ.Protection ofmonuments and
places and objects
of national
importance.Separation ofjudiciary from

executive.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IV.
ŠDirective Principles of State Policy.
ŠArts. 48AŠ51.)24Promotion ofinternational peace
and security.
 


 1[PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of IndiaŠ
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect itsideals and institutions, the National Flag and theNational Anthem;(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals whichinspired our national struggle for freedom;(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity
and integrity of India;(d) to defend the country and render nationalservice when called upon to do so;(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of commonbrotherhood amongst all the people of India
transcending religious, linguistic and regional orsectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatoryto the dignity of women;(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of ourcomposite culture;(g) to protect and improve the natural environmentincluding forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to
have compassion for living creatures;(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and
the spirit of inquiry and reform;(i) to safeguard public property and to abjureviolence;(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres ofindividual and collective activity so that the nationconstantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and
achievement;*[(k) who is a parent or guardian to provideopportunities for education to his child or, as  the

case may be, ward between the age of six andfourteen years.]Fundamentalduties.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
*Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (which is yet not inforce, date to be notified later on).25 


 PART V
THE UNIONCHAPTER I.ŠTHE EXECUTIVEThe President and Vice-President
52. There shall be a President of India.
53. (1) The executive power of the Union shall be
vested in the President and shall be exercised by him
either directly or through officers subordinate to him in
accordance with this Constitution.(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, the supreme command of the
Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in thePresident and the exercise thereof shall be regulated bylaw.
(3) Nothing in this article shallŠ(a) be deemed to transfer to the President anyfunctions conferred by any existing law on the
Government of any State or other authority; or(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by lawfunctions on authorities other than the President.54. The President shall be elected by the members of
an electoral college consisting ofŠ(a) the elected members of both Houses ofParliament; and(b) the elected members of the LegislativeAssemblies of the States.1[Explanation.ŠIn this article and in article 55, ''State''includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the

Union territory of *Pondicherry.]
The President of
India.Executive powerof the Union.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment)  Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995).
*Now Puducherry, 
vide the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f.
1-10-2006).26Election of
President. 


 55. (1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformityin the scale of representation of the different States at theelection of the President.(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformityamong the States inter se as well as parity between the
States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes
which each elected member of Parliament and of theLegislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast atsuch election shall be determined in the following
manner:Š(a) every elected member of the LegislativeAssembly of a State shall have as many votes as
there are multiples of one thousand in the quotientobtained by dividing the population of the State bythe total number of the elected members of the
Assembly;(b) if, after taking the said multiples of onethousand, the remainder is not less than five
hundred, then the vote of each member referred toin sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;(c) each elected member of either House ofParliament shall have such number of votes as may
be obtained by dividing the total number of votes
assigned to the members of the LegislativeAssemblies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and(b)  by the total number of the elected members of
both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-
half being counted as one and other fractions being
disregarded.(3) The election of the President shall be held inaccordance with the system of proportionalrepresentation by means of the single transferable vote

and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.1[Explanation.ŠIn this article, the expression''population'' means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures havebeen published:Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures haveManner of electionof President.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the Explanation(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 55.)
27 


 been published shall, until the relevant figures for thefirst census taken after the year 1[2026] have beenpublished, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.]56. (1) The President shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office:Provided thatŠ(a) the President may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Vice-President, resign his office;
(b) the President may, for violation of the
Constitution, be removed from office by impeachment
in the manner provided in article 61;(c) the President shall, notwithstanding theexpiration of his term, continue to hold office until
his successor enters upon his office.(2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President
under clause (a) of the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwithbe communicated by him to the Speaker of the House of

the People.57. A person who holds, or who has held, office as
President shall, subject to the other provisions of this
Constitution, be eligible for re-election to that office.58. (1) No person shall be eligible for election as
President unless heŠ(a) is a citizen of India,(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and(c) is qualified for election as a member of theHouse of the People.(2) A person shall not be eligible for election asPresident if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State or
under any local or other authority subject to the control
of any of the said Governments.Term of office of

President.Qualifications forelection as
President.Eligibility for re-
election.1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for ﬁ2000ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 55Š58.)
28 


 Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, a personshall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason
only that he is the President or Vice-President of the

Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.59. (1) The President shall not be a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of
any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament
or of a House of the Legislature of any State be elected
President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in
that House on the date on which he enters upon his
office as President.(2) The President shall not hold any other office ofprofit.(3) The President shall be entitled without paymentof rent to the use of his official residences and shall be

also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified
in the Second Schedule.(4) The emoluments and allowances of the Presidentshall not be diminished during his term of office.60. Every President and every person acting as
President or discharging the functions of the President
shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe
in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his

absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form,
that is to sayŠ"I, A.B., do   swear in the name of God
  that  I  will faith-
                   solemnly affirm
fully execute the office of President (or dischargethe functions of the President) of India and will to the
best of my ability preserve, protect and defend theConditions of
President's office.Oath or affirmationby the President.1The  words ﬁor Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukhﬂ omitted by the  Constitution (Seventh
Amendment)  Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 58Š60.)
29 


 Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself tothe service and well-being of the people of Indiaﬂ.61. (1) When a President is to be impeached for
violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred
by either House of Parliament.(2) No such charge shall be preferred unlessŠ(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is containedin a resolution which has been moved after at least
fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less
than one-fourth of the total number of members of
the House has been given of their intention to move
the resolution, and(b) such resolution has been passed by a majorityof not less than two-thirds of the total membership
of the House.(3) When a charge has been so preferred by eitherHouse of Parliament, the other House shall investigate
the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the
President shall have the right to appear and to be
represented at such investigation.(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution ispassed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
total membership of the House by which the charge was

investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that
the charge preferred against the President has been
sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of removing
the President from his office as from the date on which
the resolution is so passed.62. (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the
expiration of the term of office of President shall be

completed before the expiration of the term. (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of
President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or
removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible

after,  and in no case later than six months from, the date

of occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill
the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 56,Procedure for
impeachment of
the President.Time of holding
election to fill
vacancy in the
office of President
and the term of
office of person
elected to fill

casual vacancy.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 60Š62.)
30 


 be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years fromthe date on which he enters upon his office.63. There shall be a Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President shall be 
ex officio Chairman ofthe Council of States and shall not hold any other office
of profit:Provided that during any period when the Vice-
President acts as President or discharges the functions of
the President under article 65, he shall not perform the
duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States
and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance
payable to the Chairman of the Council of States under
article 97. 65. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy
in the office of the President by reason of his death,
resignation or removal, or otherwise, the Vice-President

shall act as President until the date on which a new

President elected in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.(2) When the President is unable to discharge hisfunctions owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the

date on which the President resumes his duties.(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect
of, the period while he is so acting as, or discharging the

functions of, President, have all the powers and
immunities of the President and be entitled to such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in
that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances
and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.66. (1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the
1[members of an electoral college consisting of themembers of both Houses of Parliament] in accordanceThe Vice-President

of India.The Vice-President
to be ex officioChairman of the
Council of States.The Vice-President
to act as President
or to discharge his
functions during

casual vacancies in
the office, or
during the absence,
of  President.
Election of Vice-
President.1Subs. by the Constitution (Eleventh  Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 2, for ﬁmembers of both
Houses of  Parliament assembled at a joint meetingﬂ.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 62Š66.)
31 


 with the system of proportional representation by meansof the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of
any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament
or of a House of the Legislature of any State be elected
Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his

seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon
his office as Vice-President.
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-
President unless heŠ(a) is a citizen of India;(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and(c) is qualified for election as a member of theCouncil of States.(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-
President if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State or
under any local or other authority subject to the control
of any of the said Governments.Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, a personshall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason
only that he is the President or Vice-President of the

Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.67. The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office:Provided thatŠ(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;Term of office of

Vice-President.
1The  words ﬁor Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukhﬂ omitted by the  Constitution (Seventh
Amendment)  Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 66Š67.)
32 


 (b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office
by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a
majority of all the then members of the Council and
agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution
for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the
intention to move the resolution;(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the
expiration of his term, continue to hold office until
his successor enters upon his office. 68. (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by theexpiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be

completed before the expiration of the term.  (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-
President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or
removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible

after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected

to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of
article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 69. Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon
his office, make and subscribe before the President, or
some  person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or

affirmation in the following form, that is to sayŠ
ﬁI, A.B., do  swear in the name of God that I will bear true
faith and allegiance  to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will faithfully discharge the

duty upon which I am about to enter.ﬂ
70. Parliament may make such provisions as it thinksfit for the discharge of the functions of the President in
any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.
1[71. (1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in
connection with the election of a President or Vice-

President shall be inquired into and decided by the
Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.Time of holding

election to fill
vacancy in the
office of Vice-

President and the
term of office of
person elected to
fill casual vacancy.
Oath or affirmationby the Vice-

President.Discharge of
President's
functions in other
contingencies.Matters relatingto, or connected
with, the election
of a President or
Vice-President.
1Art. 71 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment)Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-8-1975) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,

s. 10, to read as above  (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
 solemnly affirm
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 67Š71.)
33 


 (2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-
President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts
done by him in the exercise and performance of the
powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-

President, as the case may be, on or before the date of
the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated
by reason of that declaration.(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or
connected with the election of a President or Vice-

President.(4) The election of a person as President or Vice-
President shall not be called in question on the ground
of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason
among the members of the electoral college electing him.]72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant
pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishmentor to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of anyperson convicted of any offenceŠ(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence
is by a Court Martial;(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentenceis for an offence against any law relating to a matter
to which the executive power of the Union extends;(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence ofdeath.(2) Nothing in sub-clause (
a)  of clause (1) shall affect
the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed

Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a
sentence passed by a Court Martial.(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affectthe power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence of
death exercisable by the Governor 1*** of a State underany law for the time being in force.Power of President
to grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit or
commute sentences
in certain cases.1The  words ﬁor Rajpramukh ﬁ omitted by the  Constitution (Seventh Amendment)  Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 71Š72.)
34 


 73. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the executive power of the Union shall extendŠ(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliamenthas power to make laws; and(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority andjurisdiction as are  exercisable by the Government of

India by virtue of any treaty or agreement:Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, save as expressly provided in thisConstitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in
any State 1*** to matters with respect to which theLegislature of the State has also power to make laws.(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a Stateand any officer or authority of a State may,

notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to
exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has
power to make laws for that State such executive power
or functions as the State or officer or authority thereof
could exercise immediately before the commencement of

this Constitution.Council of Ministers74.  2[(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers withthe Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the
President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act
in accordance with such advice:]3[Provided that the President may require the Councilof Ministers to reconsider such advice, either generally
or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance
with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.](2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice
was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be
inquired into in any court.Extent of executive
power of the
Union.Council ofMinisters to aid
and advise
President.1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 13,  for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 73Š74.)
35 


 75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the
President and the other Ministers shall be appointed bythe President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
1[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including thePrime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not

exceed fifteen per cent.  of the total number of members
of the House of the People.(1B) A member of either House of Parliamentbelonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the
Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed

as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till thedate on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to either
House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till
the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is

earlier.]
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasureof the President.(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectivelyresponsible to the House of the People.(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, thePresident shall administer to him the oaths of office and
of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutivemonths is not a member of either House of Parliamentshall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall besuch as Parliament may from time to time by law
determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be
as specified in the Second Schedule.The Attorney-General for India76. (1) The President shall appoint a person who is
qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court
to be Attorney-General for India.(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General togive advice to the Government of India upon such legalOther provisions asto Ministers.1Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2.Attorney-Generalfor India.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 75Š76.)
36 


 matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal
character, as may from time to time be referred or
assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the
functions conferred on him by or under this Constitutionor any other law for the time being in force.(3) In the performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have right of audience in all courts in the
territory of India.(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during thepleasure of the President, and shall receive such
remuneration as the President may determine.Conduct of Government Business77.  (1) All executive action of the Government of
India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
President.(2) Orders and other instruments made and executedin the name of the President shall be authenticated insuch manner as may be specified in rules1 to be made by
the President, and the validity of an order or instrument
which is so authenticated shall not be called in question
on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made
or executed by the President.(3) The President shall make rules for the moreconvenient transaction of the business of the Government
of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the
said business. 2***        *
78. It shall be the duty of the Prime MinisterŠ
(a) to communicate to the President all decisionsof the Council of Ministers relating to theadministration of the affairs of the Union andproposals for legislation;(b) to furnish such information relating to theadministration of the affairs of the Union andproposals for legislation as the President may callfor; andConduct ofbusiness of the
Government of
India.Duties of PrimeMinister as respects
the furnishing of
information to the
President, etc.1See Notification No. S. O. 2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, 1958, Pt. II, Sec. 3(ii),  p. 1315, as amended from time to time.
2Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 14 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 12
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 76Š78.)
37 


 (c) if the President so requires, to submit for theconsideration of the Council of Ministers any matteron which a decision has been taken by a Minister butwhich has not been considered by the Council.CHAPTER II.ŠPARLIAMENTGeneral79. There shall be a Parliament for the Union which
shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known
respectively as the Council of States and the House ofthe People.80. (1) 1[2*** The Council of States] shall consist ofŠ(a) twelve members to be nominated by thePresident in accordance with the provisions of clause(3); and(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eightrepresentatives of the States 3[and of the Unionterritories.](2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States tobe filled by representatives of the States 3[and of the Unionterritories] shall be in accordance with the provisions inthat behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.(3) The members to be nominated by the Presidentunder sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall consist of personshaving special knowledge or practical experience inrespect of such matters as the following, namely:-Literature, science, art and social service.(4) The representatives of each State  4*** in the Councilof States shall be elected by the elected members of theLegislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the
system of proportional representation by means of thesingle transferable vote.(5) The representatives of the 5[Union territories] inthe Council of States shall be chosen in such manner asParliament may by law prescribe.Constitution ofParliament.Composition of theCouncil of States.1Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for ﬁThe Council of
Statesﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
2The words  ﬁsubject to  the provisions of paragraph 4 of the Tenth Scheduleﬂ omitted by
the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
3Added by the Constitution (Seventh  Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3.
4The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bys. 3, ibid.5Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for ﬁStates specified in Part C of the First Scheduleﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 78Š80.)
38 


 1[81. (1) 
2[Subject to the provisions of article 331 
3***],the House of the People shall consist ofŠ(a) not more than 4[five hundred and thirtymembers] chosen by direct election from territorialconstituencies in the States, and
(b) not more than 5[twenty members] to representthe Union territories, chosen in such manner asParliament may by law provide. (2) For the purposes of sub-clause (
a) of clause (1),Š(a) there shall be allotted to each State a numberof seats in the House of the People in such mannerthat the ratio between that number and the
population of the State is, so far as practicable, thesame for all States; and(b) each State shall be divided into territorialconstituencies in such manner that the ratio between
the population of each constituency and the numberof seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, thesame throughout the State:6[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) ofthis clause shall not be applicable for the purpose of
allotment of seats in the House of the People to anyState so long as the population of that State does notexceed six millions.](3) In this article, the expression ﬁpopulationﬂ meansthe population as ascertained at the last preceding census
of which the relevant figures have been published:7[Provided that the reference in this clause to the lastpreceding census of which the relevant figures have beenpublished shall, until the relevant figures for the first
census taken after the year  8[2026] have been published,9[be construed,ŠComposition of theHouse of the
People.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4, for arts. 81 and 82.2Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974  s. 4, for ﬁSubject to the
provisions of article 331ﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
3The words and figure ﬁand paragraph 4 of the Tenth  Scheduleﬂ omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
4Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, forﬁfive hundred and twenty-five membersﬂ (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, for ﬁtwenty-fivemembersﬂ.6Ins. by s. 2, ibid.7Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
8Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001,  s. 3, for ﬁ2000ﬂ.
9Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 81.)
39 


 (i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2)and the proviso to that clause, as a reference to the1971 census; and(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2)as a reference to the 1[2001] census.]]82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocationof seats in the House of the People to the States and thedivision of each State into territorial constituencies shallbe readjusted by such authority and in such manner as
Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affectrepresentation in the House of the People until thedissolution of the then existing House:2[Provided further that such readjustment shall takeeffect from such date as the President may, by order,
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, anyelection to the House may be held on the basis of the
territorial constituencies existing before suchreadjustment:Provided also that until the relevant figures for thefirst census taken after the year 3[2026] have beenpublished, it shall not be necessary to 4[readjustŠ(i) the allocation of seats in the House ofPeople to the States as readjusted on the basis of the
1971 census; and(ii) the division of each State into territorialconstituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of
the 5[2001] census,under this article.]]83. (1) The Council of States shall not be subject to
dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the

expiration of every second year in accordance with theprovisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
Readjustment aftereach census.Duration of Housesof Parliament.1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for ﬁ1991ﬂ.2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001,  s. 4, for ﬁ2000ﬂ.
4Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words.5Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for ﬁ1991ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 81Š83.)
40 


 1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 13, for ﬁsix yearsﬂ(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words ﬁsix yearsﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁfive yearsﬂ by

the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Subs. by  the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963,  s. 3, for cl. (
a).3Subs. by  the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6, for art. 85.
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved,shall continue for 1[five years] from the date appointedfor its first meeting and no longer and the expiration ofthe said period of 1[five years] shall operate as adissolution of the House:Provided that the said period may, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one yearat a time and not extending in any case beyond a periodof six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill
a seat in Parliament unless heŠ2[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribesbefore some person authorised in that behalf by theElection Commission an oath or affirmationaccording to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;](b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States,not less than thirty years of age and, in the case ofa seat in the House of the People, not less thantwenty-five years of age; and(c) possesses such other qualifications as may beprescribed in that behalf by or under any law made
by Parliament.3[85. (1) The President shall from time to time
summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time
and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall notintervene between its last sitting in one session and the
date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.(2) The President may from time to timeŠ(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;(b) dissolve the House of the People.]86. (1) The President may address either House of
Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for
that purpose require the attendance of members.Qualification formembership of
Parliament.Sessions ofParliament,
prorogation and
dissolution.Right of Presidentto address and
send messages to
Houses.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 83Š86.)
41 


 (2) The President may send messages to either Houseof Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then pendingin Parliament or otherwise, and a House to which anymessage is so sent shall with all convenient despatch
consider any matter required by the message to be takeninto consideration.87. (1) At the commencement of 
1[the first sessionafter each general election to the House of the Peopleand at the commencement of the first session of eachyear] the President shall address both Houses of
Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament ofthe causes of its summons.(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulatingthe procedure of either House for the allotment of time fordiscussion of the matters referred to in such address 2***.88. Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India
shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to takepart in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sittingof the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which
he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this
article be entitled to vote.Officers of Parliament89. (1) The Vice-President of India shall be 
ex officioChairman of the Council of States.(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be,choose a member of the Council to be Deputy Chairman
thereof and, so often as the office of Deputy Chairman
becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another memberto be Deputy Chairman thereof.90. A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of
the Council of StatesŠ(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be amember of the Council;(b)  may at any time, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Chairman, resign his office; and(c) may be removed from his office by a resolutionof the Council passed by a majority of all the thenmembers of the Council:1Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 7, for ﬁevery sessionﬂ.2The words ﬁand for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the Houseﬂomitted by s. 7, ibid.Special address bythe President.Rights of Ministersand Attorney-
General as respects
Houses.The Chairman andDeputy Chairman
of the Council of
States.Vacation and
resignation of, and
removal from, the
office of Deputy
Chairman.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 86Š90.)
42 


 Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause(c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days™ noticehas been given of the intention to move the resolution.91. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or
during any period when the Vice-President is acting as,

or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of
the office shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman,
or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by

such member of the Council of States as the President
may appoint for the purpose.(2) During the absence of the Chairman from anysitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, or,

if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such

person is present, such other person as may be
determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.92. (1) At any sitting of the Council of States, while
any resolution for the removal of the Vice-President from

his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in
relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to
a sitting from which the Chairman, or, as the case may

be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in,and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Council of States while any resolution for the removal of
the Vice-President from his office is under consideration

in the Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article
100, shall not be entitled to vote at all on such resolution
or on any other matter during such proceedings.93. The House of the People shall, as soon as may be,
choose two members of the House to be respectively
Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the
office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the
House shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
Power of the
Deputy Chairman
or other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as,
Chairman.The Chairman orthe Deputy
Chairman not to
preside while a
resolution for his

removal from office
is under
consideration.The Speaker and
Deputy Speaker
of the House of
the People.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 90Š93.)
43 


 94. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy
Speaker of the House of the PeopleŠ(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be amember of the House of the People;(b) may at any time, by writing under his handaddressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the

Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy

Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolutionof the House of the People passed by a majority of all
the then members of the House:Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause(c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' noticehas been given of the intention to move the resolution:Provided further that, whenever the House of thePeople is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office
until immediately before the first meeting of the House of
the People after the dissolution.95. (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the dutiesof the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,

if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such
member of the House of the People as the President may
appoint for the purpose.(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sittingof the House of the People the Deputy Speaker or, if he

is also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is

present, such other person as may be determined by the
House, shall act as Speaker.
96. (1) At any sitting of the House of the People, whileany resolution for the removal of the Speaker from his
office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any

resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his
office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall

not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of
clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to everyVacation and

resignation of, and
removal from, the
offices of Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker.
Power of theDeputy Speaker or
other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as, Speaker.
The Speaker or theDeputy Speaker
not to preside
while a resolution
for his removal
from office is
under
consideration.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 94Š96.)
44 


 such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting fromwhich the Speaker, or, as the case may be, the Deputy

Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, andotherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the House of
the People while any resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration in the House and shall,notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled tovote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.97. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People, such salaries and allowances as may be
respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, untilprovision in that behalf is so made, such salaries andallowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.98. (1) Each House of Parliament shall have a separatesecretarial staff:Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
construed as preventing the creation of posts common
to both Houses of Parliament.(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment,and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to

the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament.(3) Until provision is made by Parliament underclause (2), the President may, after consultation with the

Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of
the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of serviceof persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House
of the People or the Council of States, and any rules so
made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any
law made under the said clause.Salaries andallowances of the
Chairman and
Deputy Chairman
and the Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker.
Secretariat ofParliament.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 96Š98.)
45 


 Conduct of Business99. Every member of either House of Parliament shall,before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the
President, or some person appointed in that behalf byhim, an oath or affirmation according to the form set outfor the purpose in the Third Schedule.100. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House
or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a
majority of votes of the members present and voting,other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman orSpeaker.
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such,
shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power toact notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership
thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall be validnotwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently thatsome person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted
or otherwise took part in the proceedings.(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, thequorum to constitute a meeting of either House of
Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number ofmembers of the House.(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House thereis no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman or
Speaker, or person acting as 
such, either to adjourn theHouse or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.Disqualifications of Members101. (1) No person shall be a member of both Houses
of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliamentby law for the vacation by a person who is chosen amember of both Houses of his seat in one House or the
other.
Oath or affirmationby members.Voting in Houses,
power of Houses
to act

notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.Vacation of seats.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 99Š101.)
46 


 (2) No person shall be a member both of Parliamentand of a House of the Legislature of a State 1***, and ifa person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of
a House of the Legislature of 2[a State], then, at theexpiration of such period as may be specified in rules
3made by the President, that person's seat in Parliament
shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned
his seat in the Legislature of the State.(3) If a member of either House of ParliamentŠ(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualificationsmentioned in 4[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102],or5[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his handaddressed to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the

case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:6[Provided that in the case of any resignation referredto in sub-clause (b), if from information received or

otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit,
the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is

satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine,
he shall not accept such resignation.](4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either
House of Parliament is without permission of the House
absent from all meetings thereof, the House may declare
his seat vacant:Provided that in computing the said period of sixtydays no account shall be taken of any period during1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment)  Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., ﬁsuch a Stateﬂ.3See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, published with the Ministry
of Law Notification No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India,

Extraordinary, p. 678.
4Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for ﬁclause (1) ofarticle 102ﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
5Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2, for sub-clause (b).6Ins. by s. 2, ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 101.)
47 


 which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for morethan four consecutive days.102. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosenas, and for being, a member of either House of
ParliamentŠ(a) if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State,
other than an office declared by Parliament by law
not to disqualify its holder;(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands sodeclared by a competent court;(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarilyacquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under
any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a
foreign State;(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any lawmade by Parliament. 1[Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this clause] aperson shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of
any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for
the Union or for such State.2[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being amember of either House of Parliament if he is so
disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]
3[103. (1) If any question arises as to whether a memberof either House of Parliament has become subject to any
of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article
102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
President and his decision shall be final.Disqualifications
for membership.Decision onquestions as to
disqualifications of
members.1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for ﬁ(2) For thepurposes of this articleﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985)
2Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3Art. 103 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)Act, 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,

1978, s. 14 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 101Š103.)
48 


 (2) Before giving any decision on any such question,the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election
Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]104. If a person sits or votes as a member of either
House of Parliament before he has complied with the
requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is
not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership
thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be

liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes
to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a
debt due to the Union.Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliamentand its Members105. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the rules and standing orders regulating the
procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of speechin Parliament.(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to anyproceedings in any court in respect of any thing said or
any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the

publication by or under the authority of either House of
Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges andimmunities of each House of Parliament, and of the
members and the committees of each House, shall be
such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament
by law, and, until so defined, 
1[shall be those of thatHouse and of its members and committees immediately
before the coming into force of section 15 of the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.]
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shallapply in relation to persons who by virtue of this
Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise toPenalty for sitting
and voting before
making oath or
affirmation under
article 99 or when
not qualified or
when disqualified.Powers, privileges,etc., of the Houses
of Parliament and
of the members
and committees
thereof.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 15, for certain words(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 103Š105.)
49 


 take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament orany committee thereof as they apply in relation to members
of Parliament.106. Members of either House of Parliament shall be
entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may
from time to time be determined by Parliament by law
and, until provision in that respect is so made, allowances
at such rates and upon such conditions as were
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution applicable in the case of members of the
Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.Legislative Procedure
107. (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 and
117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills,

a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109,a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the
Houses of Parliament unless it has been agreed to by
both Houses, either without amendment or with such
amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse byreason of the prorogation of the Houses.(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which hasnot been passed by the House of the People shall not
lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People,or which having been passed by the House of the People
is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the
provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the
House of the People.108. (1) If after a Bill has been passed by one House
and transmitted to the other HouseŠ(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to theamendments to be made in the Bill; orSalaries and
allowances of
members.Provisions as tointroduction and
passing of Bills.Joint sitting of bothHouses in certain
cases.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 105Š108.)
50 


 (c) more than six months elapse from the date ofthe reception of the Bill by the other House without
the Bill being passed by it,the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason
of a dissolution of the House of the People, notify to the
Houses by message if they are sitting or by public
notification if they are not sitting, his intention to
summon them to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose
of deliberating and voting on the Bill:Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to aMoney Bill.(2) In reckoning any such period of six months as isreferred to in clause (1), no account shall be taken of

any period during which the House referred to in
sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned formore than four consecutive days.(3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified
his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a
joint sitting, neither House shall proceed further with
the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date
of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint
sitting for the purpose specified in the notification and,
if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill,with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint

sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number of
members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be
deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to have
been passed by both Houses:Provided that at a joint sittingŠ(a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House,has not been passed by the other House with
amendments and returned to the House in which it
originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the
Bill other than such amendments (if any) as are made
necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 108.)
51 


 (b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned,only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed
to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant
to the matters with respect to which the Houses  have
not agreed;and the decision of the person presiding as to the
amendments which are admissible under this clause shall
be final.(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article anda Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution
of the House of the People has intervened since the
President notified his intention to summon the Houses to
meet therein.
109. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the
Council of States.(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Houseof the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of
States for its recommendations and the Council of States
shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the
People with its recommendations and the House of the

People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of
the recommendations of the Council of States.(3) If the House of the People accepts any of therecommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill
shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses
with the amendments recommended by the Council of
States and accepted by the House of the People.(4) If the House of the People does not accept any ofthe recommendations of the Council of States, the Money
Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses
in the form in which it was passed by the House of the

People without any of the amendments recommended by
the Council of States.(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the Peopleand transmitted to the Council of States for its
recommendations is not returned to the House of theTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 108-109.)
52Special procedurein respect of
Money Bills. 


 People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall bedeemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was
passed by the House of the People.110.
 (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall
be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only
provisions dealing with all or any of the following
matters, namely:Š(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alterationor regulation of any tax;(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money orthe giving of any guarantee by the Government of

India, or the amendment of the law with respect to

any financial obligations undertaken or to be
undertaken by the Government of India;(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or theContingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys
into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such
Fund;(d) the appropriation of moneys out of theConsolidated Fund of India;(e) the declaring of any expenditure to beexpenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;(f) the receipt of money on account of theConsolidated Fund of India or the public account of
India or the custody or issue of such money or the
audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or(g) any matter incidental to any of the mattersspecified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill byreason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment
of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.Definition of
ﬁMoney Billsﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 109-110.)
53 


 (3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a MoneyBill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the House of
the People thereon shall be final.(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill whenit is transmitted to the Council of States under
article 109, and when it is presented to the President for
assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of

the House of the People signed by him that it is a Money
Bill.111. When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of
Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and
the President shall declare either that he assents to the
Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom:Provided that the President may, as soon as possible
after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the
Bill if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message
requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or any
specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will

consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message, and
when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider

the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the

Houses with or without amendment and presented to the
President for assent, the President shall not withhold
assent therefrom.Procedure in Financial Matters112. (1) The President shall in respect of every financialyear cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament
a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred

to as the ﬁannual financial statementﬂ.(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in theannual financial statement shall show separatelyŠ(a) the sums required to meet expenditure describedby this Constitution as expenditure charged upon
the Consolidated Fund of India; andAssent to Bills.Annual financialstatement.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 110Š112.)
54 


 (b) the sums required to meet other expenditureproposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of

India,and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue accountfrom other expenditure.(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditurecharged on the Consolidated Fund of  IndiaŠ
(a) the emoluments and allowances of thePresident and other expenditure relating to his office;(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairmanand the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States
and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House
of the People;(c) debt charges for which the Government of Indiais liable including interest, sinking fund charges and
redemption charges, and other expenditure relating
to the raising of loans and the service and redemption
of debt;(d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensionspayable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme
Court;(ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judgesof the Federal Court;(iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judgesof any High Court which exercises jurisdiction in
relation to any area included in the territory of India
or which at any time before the commencement of
this Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to
any area included in 1[a Governor's Province of theDominion of India];(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to
or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India;1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ﬁa
Province corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Scheduleﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 112.)
55 


 (f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment,decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;(g) any other expenditure declared by thisConstitution or by Parliament by law to be so
charged.113. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India
shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but
nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing
the discussion in either House of Parliament of any of
those estimates. (2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other
expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands
for grants to the House of the People, and the House of
the People shall have power to assent, or to refuse to
assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject
to a reduction of the amount specified therein. (3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on
the recommendation of the President.114. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 113 have been made by the House of the People,

there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the
appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of
all moneys required to meetŠ(a) the grants so made by the House of the People;and(b) the expenditure charged on the ConsolidatedFund of India but not exceeding in any case the
amount shown in the statement previously laid before
Parliament.(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Billin either House of Parliament which will have the effect
of varying the amount or altering the destination of any
grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the

decision of the person presiding as to whether an
amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be

final.Procedure in
Parliament with
respect to
estimates.AppropriationBills.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 112Š114.)
56 


 (3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116,
no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
Fund of India except under appropriation made by law
passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.115. (1) The President shallŠ
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made inaccordance with the provisions of article 114 to be

expended for a particular service for the current
financial year is found to be insufficient for the
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen
during the current financial year for supplementary
or additional expenditure upon some new service
not contemplated in the annual financial statement
for that year, or
(b) if any money has been spent on any serviceduring a financial year in excess of the amount
granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliamentanother statement showing the estimated amount of that
expenditure or cause to be presented to the House of the
People a demand for such excess, as the case  may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall
have effect in relation to any such statement and
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made

authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or
the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect
in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of India to meet such expenditure or grant.116. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall

have powerŠ(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of theestimated expenditure for a part of any financialSupplementary,

additional or
excess grants.Votes on account,
votes of credit
and exceptional
grants.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 114Š116.)
57 


 year pending the completion of the procedureprescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant

and the passing of the law in accordance with the
provisions of article 114 in relation to that

expenditure;(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpecteddemand upon the resources of India when on account
of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the
service the demand cannot be stated with the details
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms nopart of the current service of any financial year;and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law thewithdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of
India for the purposes for which the said grants are
made.(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have
effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause
(1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with
regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual
financial statement and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.117. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for
any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) ofclause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved

except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill
making such provision shall not be introduced in the
Council of States:Provided that no recommendation shall be requiredunder this clause for the moving of an amendment making
provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to makeprovision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only
that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of
fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason
that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,Special provisions
as to financial Bills.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 116-117.)
58 


 alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authorityor body for local purposes.(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought intooperation, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament unless the President has re-
commended to that House the consideration of the Bill.Procedure Generally118. (1) Each House of Parliament may make rules forregulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
its procedure and the conduct of its business.(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rulesof procedure and standing orders in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution with
respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall
have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein
by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker
of the House of the People, as the case may be.(3) The President, after consultation with theChairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the
House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure
with respect to joint sittings of, and communications
between, the two Houses.(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker ofthe House of the People, or in his absence such person
as may be determined by rules of procedure made under
clause (3), shall preside.119.
 Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely
completion of financial business, regulate by law the

procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House
of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any
Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any
provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any
rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of
article 118 or with any rule or standing order having
Rules of
procedure.Regulation by lawof procedure in
Parliament in
relation to financial
business.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 117Š119.)
59 


 effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of thatarticle, such provision shall prevail.120. (1) Notwithstanding anything in  Part XVII, but
subject to the provisions of article 348, business in
Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:Provided that the Chairman of the Council of Statesor Speaker of the House of the People, or person acting
as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who
cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English
to address the House in his mother-tongue.(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, thisarticle shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen
years from the commencement of this Constitution, have
effect as if the words "or in English" were omitted
therefrom.121. No discussion shall take place in Parliament
with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties
except upon a motion for presenting an address to the
President praying for the removal of the Judge as
hereinafter provided.122. (1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliamentshall not be called in question on the ground of any
alleged irregularity of procedure.(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whompowers are vested by or under this Constitution for
regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the

jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him
of those powers.CHAPTER III.ŠLEGISLATIVE
 POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT123. (1) If at any time, except when both Houses of
Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to
take immediate action, he may promulgate such
Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.Language to be
used in
Parliament.Restriction ondiscussion inParliament.Courts not toinquire into
proceedings of
Parliament.Power of Presidentto promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Parliament.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 119Š123.)
60 


 (2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shallhave the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament,
but every such OrdinanceŠ(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliamentand shall cease to operate at the expiration of six
weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before

the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving
it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the
second of those resolutions; and(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.Explanation.ŠWhere the Houses of Parliament aresummoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of
six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those
dates for the purposes of this clause.(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this articlemakes any provision which Parliament would not under
this Constitution be competent to enact, it shall be void.1* * * *
CHAPTER IV.ŠT
HE UNION JUDICIARY
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Indiaconsisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament
by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than

seven2  other Judges.(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall beappointed by the President by warrant under his hand
and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as
the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five
years:Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judgeother than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of IndiaEstablishment and
constitution of
Supreme Court.1Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Now ﬁtwenty-fiveﬂ, vide the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act,
1986 (22 of 1986), s. 2.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 123-124.)
61 


 shall always be consulted:Provided further thatŠ(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in themanner provided in clause (4).1[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shallbe determined by such authority and in such manner as
Parliament may by law provide.](3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment asa Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of

India andŠ(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of aHigh Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession; or(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate ofa High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession; or(c) is, in the opinion of the President, adistinguished jurist.Explanation I.ŠIn this clause "High Court'' means aHigh Court which exercises, or which at any time before
the commencement of this Constitution exercised,
jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.Explanation II.ŠIn computing for the purpose of thisclause the period during which a person has been an
advocate, any period during which a person has held
judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge after
he became an advocate shall be included.(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removedfrom his office except by an order of the President
passed after an address by each House of Parliament
supported by a majority of the total membership of

that House and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of that House present and1Ins. by  the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 124.)
62 


 voting has been presented to the President in the samesession for such removal on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure forthe presentation of an address and for the investigation
and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge
under clause (4).(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of theSupreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office,

make and subscribe before the President, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation

according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule.(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of theSupreme Court shall plead or act in any court or before
any authority within the territory of India.
125. 1[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of theSupreme Court such salaries as may be determined by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is
so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second
Schedule.](2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privilegesand allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of
absence and pension as may from time to time be
determined by or under law made by Parliament and,
until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and
rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:Provided that neither the privileges nor theallowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave
of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.126. When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacantor when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or
otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office,1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for  cl.  (1)  (w.e.f.
1-4-1986).Salaries, etc., ofJudges.Appointment of
acting Chief Justice.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 124Š126.)
63 


 the duties of the office shall be performed by such one ofthe other Judges of the Court as the President may appointfor the purpose.127. (1) If at any time there should not be a quorum
of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or

continue any session of the Court, the Chief Justice of
India may, with the previous consent of the President

and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at
the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for suchperiod as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court

duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme
Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been sodesignated, in priority to other duties of his office, to
attend the sittings of the Supreme Court at the time andfor the period for which his attendance is required, andwhile so attending he shall have all the jurisdiction,
powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties, of
a Judge of the Supreme Court.128. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the
Chief Justice of India may at any time, with the previous
consent of the President, request any person who has
held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of theFederal Court  1[or who has held the office of a Judge ofa High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of

the Supreme Court, and every such person so requested
shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such
allowances as the President may by order determine andhave all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, butshall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that
Court:Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemedto require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as
a Judge of that Court unless he consents so to do.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3.Appointment ofad hoc Judges.Attendance ofretired Judges at
sittings of the
Supreme Court.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 126Š128.)
64 


 129. The Supreme Court shall be a court of record
and shall have all the powers of such a court including
the power to punish for contempt of itself.130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such
other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may,

with the approval of the President, from time to time,
appoint.131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, theSupreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court,
have original jurisdiction in any disputeŠ(a) between the Government of India and one ormore States; or(b) between the Government of India and anyState or States on one side and one or more other
States on the other; or(c) between two or more States,if and in so far as the dispute involves any question(whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent
of a legal right depends:1[Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extendto a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant,

engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which,
having been entered into or executed before the
commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation
after such commencement, or which provides that the
said jurisdiction shall not extend to such a dispute.]2131A. [Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court inregard to questions as to constitutional validity of Central
laws.] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,1977, s. 4 (
w.e.f. 
13-4-1978).132. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court
in the territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or
Supreme Court to
be a court of
record.Seat of SupremeCourt.Originaljurisdiction of the
Supreme Court.Appellatejurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
appeals from High
Courts in certain
cases.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the proviso.2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 129Š132.)
65 


 other proceeding,  1[if the High Court certifies under article134A] that the case involves a substantial question of

law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.2* *                  *                 *
(3) Where such a certificate is given, 3*** any party inthe case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground
that any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly
decided 3***.Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, theexpression ﬁfinal orderﬂ includes an order deciding an
issue which, if decided in favour of the appellant, would
be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.133. 4[(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Courtfrom any judgment, decree or final order in a civil
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India 5[ifthe High Court certifies under article 134AŠ](a) that the case involves a substantial question oflaw of general importance; and(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the saidquestion needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.](2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any partyappealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may
urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution has been wrongly decided.(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, noappeal shall, unless Parliament by law otherwise
provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment,
decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court.Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
appeals from High
Courts in regard to
civil matters.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for ﬁif the HighCourt certifiesﬂ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2Cl. (2) omitted by s. 17, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
3Certain words omitted by s. 17, 
ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
4Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
27-2-1973).5Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 18, for ﬁif the HighCourt certifiesŠﬂ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 132-133.)
66 


 134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Courtfrom any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if
the High CourtŠ(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal ofan accused person and sentenced him to death; or(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any casefrom any court subordinate to its authority and has
in such trial convicted the accused person and
sentenced him to death; or(c) 1[certifies under article 134A] that the case is afit one for appeal to the Supreme Court:Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shalllie subject to such provisions as may be made in that
behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such
conditions as the High Court may establish or require.(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme
Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals
from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
specified in such law.
2[134A. Every High Court, passing or making a
judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to in

clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or
clause (1) of article 134,Š(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion;
and(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on
behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately after the
passing or making of such judgment, decree, final

order or sentence,determine, as soon as may be after such passing ormaking, the question whether a certificate of the natureAppellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
regard to criminal
matters.Certificate forappeal to the
Supreme Court.1Subs. by  the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 19, for ﬁcertifiesﬂ
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 134-134A.)
67 


 referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) ofarticle 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (
c) of clause(1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.]135. Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, theSupreme Court shall also have jurisdiction and powers
with respect to any matter to which the provisions of
article 133 or article 134 do not apply if jurisdiction and
powers in relation to that matter were exercisable by the
Federal Court immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution under any existing law.
136. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special

leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination,
sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made
by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment,determination, sentence or order passed or made by any
court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating
to the Armed Forces.137. Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the
Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment
pronounced or order made by it.138. (1) The Supreme Court shall have such further
jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters
in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such furtherjurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter as the
Government of India and the Government of any State
may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law

provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers
by the Supreme Court.139. Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme
Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including
writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,quo warranto and certiorari,
 or any of them, for any
purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of
article 32.Jurisdiction and
powers of the
Federal Court
under existing law
to be exercisable by
the Supreme Court.Special leave toappeal by the
Supreme Court.Review ofjudgments or
orders by the
Supreme Court.Enlargement ofthe jurisdiction of
the Supreme
Court.Conferment onthe Supreme
Court of powers
to issue certain
writs.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 134
AŠ139.)68 


 1[139A. 2[(1) Where cases involving the same orsubstantially the same questions of law are pending
before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts
or before two or more High Courts and the Supreme
Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application
made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to
any such case that such questions are substantial
questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may
withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court
or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself:Provided that the Supreme Court may afterdetermining the said questions of law return any case so
withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such

questions to the High Court from which the case has
been withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt
thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity
with such judgment.](2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient
so to do for the ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal
or other proceedings pending before any High Court to
any other High Court.]140. Parliament may by law make provision for
conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental
powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of
this Constitution as may appear to be necessary or
desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by
or under this Constitution.141. The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be
binding on all courts within the territory of India.142. (1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its
jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as
is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or
matter pending before it, and any decree so passed orTransfer of certain

cases.Ancillary powers ofSupreme Court.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for  cl. (1) (w.e.f.
1-8-1979).Law declared by
Supreme Court to bebinding on all courts.Enforcement ofdecrees and orders

of Supreme Court
and orders as to

discovery, etc.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 139
AŠ142.)69 


 order so made shall be enforceable throughout theterritory of India in such manner as may be prescribed

by or under any law made by Parliament and, until
provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as
the President may by order1  prescribe.(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in thisbehalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects
the whole of the territory of India, have all and every
power to make any order for the purpose of securing the
attendance of any person, the discovery or production of
any documents, or the investigation or punishment of
any contempt of itself.143.  (1) If at any time it appears to the President that
a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise,

which is of such a nature and of such public importance
that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme
Court upon it, he may refer the question to that Court for
consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it

thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in
2*** the proviso to article 131, refer a dispute of the kindmentioned in the 3[said proviso] to the Supreme Courtfor opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after such
hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion
thereon.144. All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territoryof India shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.4144A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questionsrelating to constitutional validity of laws.] Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-third Amendment
) Act, 1977, s.
 5(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
Power of President
to consult Supreme
Court.Civil and judicialauthorities to act in
aid of the Supreme
Court.1See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C. O.  47).
2The words , brackets and figures ﬁclause (i) ofﬂ omitted by the Constitution (SeventhAmendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.3Subs. by  s. 29 and Sch., 
 ibid.,
 for ﬁsaid clauseﬂ.
4Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,  s. 25  (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 142Š144
A.)70 


 145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time,
with the approval of the President, make rules for
regulating generally the practice and procedure of the
Court includingŠ(a) rules as to the persons practising before theCourt;(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appealsand other matters pertaining to appeals including
the time within which appeals to the Court are to be
entered;(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for theenforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III;1[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Courtunder 2[article 139A];](d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals undersub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134;(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which anyjudgment pronounced or order made by the Court
may be reviewed and the procedure for such review
including the time within which applications to the
Court for such review are to be entered;(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to anyproceedings in the Court and as to the fees to be

charged in respect of proceedings therein;(g) rules as to the granting of bail;(h) rules as to stay of proceedings;(i) rules providing for the summary determinationof any appeal which appears to the Court to be
frivolous or vexatious or brought for the purpose of
delay;(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referredto in clause (1) of article 317.Rules of Court, etc.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for ﬁarticles 131Aand 139Aﬂ (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArt. 145.)
71 


 (2) Subject to the 
1[provisions of 2*** clause (3)], rulesmade under this article may fix the minimum number ofJudges who are to sit for any purpose, and may provide
for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.(3) 3[2*** The minimum number] of Judges who are tosit for the purpose of deciding any case involving a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of thisConstitution or for the purpose of hearing any referenceunder article 143 shall be five:Provided that, where the Court hearing an appealunder any of the provisions of this Chapter other than
article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the
course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is satisfied
that the appeal involves a substantial question of law asto the interpretation of this Constitution the determinationof which is necessary for the disposal of the appeal, such
Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court
constituted as required by this clause for the purpose of
deciding any case involving such a question and shallon receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal inconformity with such opinion.(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the SupremeCourt save in open Court, and no report shall be made
under article 143 save in accordance with an opinion
also delivered in open Court.(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall bedelivered by the Supreme Court save with theconcurrence of a majority of the Judges present at the
hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to prevent a Judge who does not concur from

delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.146. (1) Appointments of officers and servants of the
Supreme Court shall be made by the Chief Justice ofIndia or such other Judge or officer of the Court as hemay direct:1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for ﬁprovisionsof clause (3)ﬂ  (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,  1977,  s. 6
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
3Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for ﬁThe minimum
numberﬂ (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
Officers andservants and the
expenses of the
Supreme Court.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 145-146.)
72 


 Provided that the President may by rule require thatin such cases as may be specified in the rule, no person
not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to
any office connected with the Court, save after
consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made byParliament, the conditions of service of officers and
servants of the Supreme Court shall be such as may be
prescribed by  rules made by the Chief Justice of India or

by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised
by the Chief Justice of India to make rules for the
purpose:Provided that the rules made under this clause shall,so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or
pensions, require the approval of the President.(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court,including all salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of
the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund
of India, and any fees or other moneys taken by the
Court shall form part of that Fund.147. In this Chapter and in Chapter V of Part VI,
references to any substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of this Constitution shall be construed as
including references to any substantial question of law
as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act,
1935 (including any enactment amending or
supplementing that Act), or of any Order in Council or
order made thereunder, or of the Indian Independence

Act, 1947, or of any order made thereunder.
CHAPTER V.ŠC
OMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
-GENERAL OFINDIA148. (1) There shall be a Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India who shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be
removed from office in like manner and on the like

grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.Interpretation.Comptroller andAuditor-General
of India.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 146Š148.)
73 


 (2) Every person appointed to be the Comptroller andAuditor-General of India shall, before he enters upon
his office, make and subscribe before the President, or
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.(3) The salary and other conditions of service of theComptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may
be determined by Parliament by law and, until they are
so determined, shall be as specified in the Second
Schedule:Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller andAuditor-General nor his rights in respect of leave of
absence, pension or age of retirement shall be varied to
his disadvantage after his appointment.(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall notbe eligible for further office either under the Government
of India or under the Government of any State after he
has ceased to hold his office.(5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution andof any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service
of persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts
Department and the administrative powers of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may
be prescribed by rules made by the President after
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.(6) The administrative expenses of the office of theComptroller and Auditor-General, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the
persons serving in that office, shall be charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of India.149. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall
perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation
to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of any

other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under
any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that
behalf is so made, shall perform such duties and exercise
such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union andDuties and
powers of the
Comptroller and
Auditor-General.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 148-149.)
74 


 of the States as were conferred on or exercisable by theAuditor-General of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution in relation to the
accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces
respectively.
 1[150. The accounts of the Union and of the States
shall be kept in such form as the President may, 
2[on theadvice of] the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India,
prescribe.]151. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India relating to the accounts of the Union
shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them
to be laid before each House of Parliament.(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of a State shall
be submitted to the Governor 3*** of the State, who shallcause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 27, for  art. 150
(w.e.f. 1-4-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 22, for ﬁafterconsultation withﬂ  (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.Form of accountsof the Union and

of the States.
Audit reports.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part V.
ŠThe Union.ŠArts. 149Š151.)
75 


 PART VI
THE STATES 
1***CHAPTER I.ŠGENERAL152. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,the expression ﬁStateﬂ 2[does not include the State ofJammu and Kashmir].CHAPTER II.ŠTHE EXECUTIVEThe Governor153. There shall be a Governor for each State:
3[Provided that nothing in this article shall preventthe appointment of the same person as Governor for two
or more States.]154. (1) The executive power of the State shall be
vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him
either directly or through officers subordinate to him in
accordance with this Constitution.(2) Nothing in this article shallŠ(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor anyfunctions conferred by any existing law on any other
authority; or(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of theState from conferring by law functions on any
authority subordinate to the Governor.
155. The Governor of a State shall be appointed by
the President by warrant under his hand and seal.156. (1) The Governor shall hold office during the
pleasure of the President.Definition.76Governors of
States.Executive powerof State.Appointment ofGovernor.
Term of office of
Governor.
1The words ﬁIN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULEﬂ  omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for ﬁmeans a State specified in Part A of the FirstScheduleﬂ.3Added  by s. 6,
 ibid
. 


 (2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office.(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article,a Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office:Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding theexpiration of his term, continue to hold office until his

successor enters upon his office.157. No person shall be eligible for appointment as
Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has
completed the age of thirty-five years.158. (1) The Governor shall not be a member of eitherHouse of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature ofany State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member
of either House of Parliament or of a House of theLegislature of any such State be appointed Governor, he
shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House
on the date on which he enters upon his office asGovernor.
(2) The Governor shall not hold any other office ofprofit.(3) The Governor shall be entitled without paymentof rent to the use of his official residences and shall be

also entitled to such emoluments, allowances andprivileges as may be determined by Parliament by lawand, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specifiedin the Second Schedule.1[(3A) Where the same person is appointed as
Governor of two or more States, the emoluments andallowances payable to the Governor shall be allocatedamong the States in such proportion as the President
may by order determine.](4) The emoluments and allowances of the Governorshall not be diminished during his term of office.159. Every Governor and every person discharging
the functions of the Governor shall, before entering uponhis office, make and subscribe in the presence of the ChiefJustice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction inrelation to the State, or, in his absence, the seniormost
Qualifications forappointment as
Governor.
Conditions ofGovernor's office.Oath or affirmationby the Governor.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 7.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 156Š159.)
77 


 Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in
the following form, that is to sayŠﬁI, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will  faithfullyexecute the office of Governor (or discharge the functionsof the Governor) of .............(name of the State
) and  will  to
the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend theConstitution and the law and that I will devote myself tothe service and well-being of the people of ..–––(nameof the State).ﬂ160. The President may make such provision as he
thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of theGovernor of a State in any contingency not provided forin this Chapter.
161. The Governor of a State shall have the power to
grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions ofpunishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentenceof any person convicted of any offence against any law
relating to a matter to which the executive power of theState extends.162. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, theexecutive power of a State shall extend to the matterswith respect to which the Legislature of the State haspower to make laws:  Provided that in any matter with respect to which
the Legislature of a State and Parliament have power tomake laws, the executive power of the State shall besubject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly
conferred by this Constitution or by any law made byParliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.Council of Ministers163. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with theChief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Governorin the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he isby or under this Constitution required to exercise hisfunctions or any of them in his discretion.(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or isnot a matter as respects which the Governor is by orunder this Constitution required to act in his discretion,the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall befinal, and the validity of anything done by the Governorshall not be called in question on the ground that heought or ought not to have acted in his discretion.solemnly affirmDischarge of thefunctions of the
Governor in certain

contingencies.Power of Governorto grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit or
commute sentences
in certain cases.Extent of executivepower of State.Council ofMinisters to aid
and advise
Governor.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 159Š163.)
78 


 (3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice
was tendered by Ministers to the Governor shall not beinquired into in any court.164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the
Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed bythe Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the
Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor:Provided that in the States of 1[Chhattisgarh,Jharkhand], Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be
a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition
be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and
backward classes or any other work.2[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including theChief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a State shall

not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number ofmembers of the Legislative Assembly of that State:Provided that the number of Ministers, including theChief Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve: Provided further that where the total number of
Ministers including the Chief Minister in the Council ofMinisters in any State at the commencement of theConstitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds
the said fifteen per cent.  or the number specified in the

first proviso, as the case may be, then the total number of

Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity
with the provisions of this clause within six months fromsuch date* as the President may by public notificationappoint.(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a Stateor either House of the Legislature of a State having
Legislative Council belonging to any political party who
is disqualified for being a member of that House under
paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be
disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause(1) for duration of the period commencing from the date
of his disqualification till the date on which the term of
his office as such member would expire or where he
contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a
State or either House of the Legislature of a State havingLegislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiryof such period, till the date on which he is declaredelected, whichever is earlier.]
Other provisionsas to Ministers.1Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006, s. 2, for ﬁBiharﬂ.2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3.*7-1-2004, vide S.O. 21(E), dated 7-1-2004.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 163-164.)
79 


 (2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectivelyresponsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, theGovernor shall administer to him the oaths of office and
of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutivemonths is not a member of the Legislature of the State
shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be
such as the Legislature of the State may from time to time
by law determine and, until the Legislature of the State
so determines, shall be as specified in the Second
Schedule.The Advocate-General for the State165. (1) The Governor of each State shall appoint aperson who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a
High Court to be Advocate-General for the State.(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General togive advice to the Government of the State upon such
legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal

character, as may from time to time be referred or

assigned to him by the Governor, and to discharge the

functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution
or any other law for the time being in force.(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office duringthe pleasure of the Governor, and shall receive such

remuneration as the Governor may determine.Conduct of Government Business166. (1) All executive action of the Government of a
State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executedin the name of the Governor shall be authenticated in
such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by
the Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument

which is so authenticated shall not be called in question
on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made
or executed by the Governor.
Advocate-General
for the State.Conduct ofbusiness of the
Government of a
State.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 164Š166.)
80 


 (3) The Governor shall make rules for the more
convenient transaction of the business of the Governmentof the State, and for the allocation among Ministers ofthe said business in so far as it is not business withrespect to which the Governor is by or under this
Constitution required to act in his discretion.1*               *               *              *            *
167. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of eachStateŠ(a) to communicate to the Governor of the Stateall decisions of the Council of Ministers relating tothe administration of the affairs of the State andproposals for legislation;(b) to furnish such information relating to theadministration of the affairs of the State and
proposals for legislation as the Governor may callfor; and(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for theconsideration of the Council of Ministers any matteron which a decision has been taken by a Minister
but which has not been considered by the Council.CHAPTER III.ŠTHE STATE
 LEGISLATURE
General168. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature
which shall consist of the Governor, andŠ
(a) in the States of 2[Andhra Pradesh,] Bihar, 
3***4[Madhya Pradesh], 5*** 6[Maharashtra], 7[Karnataka], 8***9[and Uttar Pradesh], two Houses;(b) in other States, one House.Duties of ChiefMinister as
respects the
furnishing of
information to
Governor, etc.
Constitution ofLegislatures in
States.1Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28  (w.e.f.
3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 23
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 (1 of 2006), s. 3 (w.e.f.
30-3-2007).3The word ﬁBombayﬂ omitted by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960),
s.  20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
4No date has been appointed under s. 8(2) of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, for the insertion of the words ﬁMadhya Pradeshﬂ in this sub-clause.5The words ﬁTamil Nadu,ﬂ omitted by Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition) Act,
1986 (40 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986).
6Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
7Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 4, for
ﬁMysoreﬂ (w.e.f 1-1
1-1973), which was inserted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 8(1).8The word ﬁPunjab,ﬂ omitted by the Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969(46 of 1969), s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-1970).
9Subs. by the West Bengal Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 (20 of 1969), s. 4, for
ﬁUttar Pradesh and West Bengalﬁ (w.e.f. 1-8-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 166Š168.)
81 


 (2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature ofa State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council
and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where

there is only one House, it shall be known as the
Legislative Assembly.
169. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 168,
Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of theLegislative Council of a State having such a Council orfor the creation of such a Council in a State having no
such Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total
membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of the members of the Assemblypresent and voting.(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall containsuch provisions for the amendment of this Constitution

as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of
the law and may also contain such supplemental,
incidental and consequential provisions as Parliamentmay deem necessary.
(3) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to bean amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.1[170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, theLegislative Assembly of each State shall consist of not

more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies inthe State.(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall bedivided into territorial constituencies in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each constituency
and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the State.2[Explanation.ŠIn this clause, the expressionﬁpopulationﬂ means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures havebeen published:Abolition orcreation of
Legislative
Councils in
States.1Subs. by the  Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 9,  for art. 170.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 , s. 29, for the Explanation(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
Composition ofthe Legislative
Assemblies.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 168Š170.)
82 


 Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures havebeen published shall, until the relevant figures for thefirst census taken after the year 1[2026] have beenpublished, be construed as a reference to the 2[2001]census.](3) Upon the completion of each census, the totalnumber of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each Stateand the division of each State into territorialconstituencies shall be readjusted by such authority andin such manner as Parliament may by law determine: Provided that such readjustment shall not affect
representation in the Legislative Assembly until thedissolution of the then existing Assembly:] 3[Provided further that such readjustment shall takeeffect from such date as the President may, by order,
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, anyelection to the Legislative Assembly may be held on thebasis of the territorial constituencies existing before suchreadjustment:Provided also that until the relevant figures for thefirst census taken after the year 1[2026] have beenpublished, it shall not be necessary to 4[readjustŠ(i) the total number of seats in the LegislativeAssembly of each State as readjusted on the basis ofthe 1971 census; and(ii) the division of such State into territorialconstituencies as may be readjusted on the basis ofthe 2[2001] census,under this clause.]171. (1) The total number of members in theLegislative Council of a State having such a Councilshall not exceed 5[one-third] of the total number ofmembers in the Legislative Assembly of that State: Provided that the total number of members in the
Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be lessthan forty.
1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for ﬁ2000ﬂ andﬁ1971ﬂ respectively.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4, for ﬁ1991ﬂ.3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).4Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for certain words.5Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 10, for ﬁone-fourthﬂ.Composition of
the Legislative
Councils.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 170-171.)
83 


 (2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, thecomposition of the Legislative Council of a State shall beas provided in clause (3).(3) Of the total number of members of the LegislativeCouncil of a StateŠ(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected
by electorates consisting of members of
municipalities, district boards and such other local
authorities in the State as Parliament may by law

specify;(b) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be electedby electorates consisting of persons residing in the
State who have been for at least three years graduates
of any university in the territory of India or have
been for at least three years in possession of
qualifications prescribed by or under any law made
by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of
any such university;(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be electedby electorates consisting of persons who have been
for at least three years engaged in teaching in such

educational institutions within the State, not lower
in standard than that of a secondary school, as may
be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament;(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected
by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the
State from amongst persons who are not members of
the Assembly;(e) the remainder shall be nominated by theGovernor in accordance with the provisions of
clause (5).(4) The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a),(b) and (c) of clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorialconstituencies as may be prescribed by or under any law
made by Parliament, and the elections under the said
sub-clauses and under sub-clause (d) of the said clauseshall be held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote.(5) The members to be nominated by the Governorunder sub-clause (e) of clause (3) shall consist of persons
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArt. 171.)
84 


 having special knowledge or practical experience inrespect of such matters as the following, namely:ŠLiterature, science, art, co-operative movement andsocial service.172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State,
unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 1[five years]from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer
and the expiration of the said period of 1[five years] shalloperate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
 Provided that the said period may, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year
at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period
of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not besubject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third
of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on
the expiration of every second year in accordance with
the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to
fill a seat in the Legislature of a State unless heŠ2[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribesbefore some person authorised in that behalf by the
Election Commission an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;](b) is, in the case of a seat in the LegislativeAssembly, not less than 
twenty-five years of age and,in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not
less than thirty years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may beprescribed in that behalf by or under any law made
by Parliament.Duration of State
Legislatures.Qualification formembership of the
State Legislature.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 24, for ﬁsix yearsﬂ(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words ﬁsix yearsﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁfive yearsﬂ by the

Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for cl. (a).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 171Š173.)
85 


 1[174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time
summon the House or each House of the Legislature ofthe State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit,
but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting
in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting
in the next session.(2) The Governor may from time to timeŠ(a) prorogue the House or either House;(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.]
175. (1) The Governor may address the Legislative
Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, either House of the Legislature of the State, orboth Houses assembled together, and may for that purpose

require the attendance of members.(2) The Governor may send messages to the House orHouses of the Legislature of the State, whether with
respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislature orotherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent
shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter
required by the message to be taken into consideration.176. (1) At the commencement of 2[the first sessionafter each general election to the Legislative Assembly
and at the commencement of the first session of each
year], the Governor shall address the LegislativeAssembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, both Houses assembled together and inform the
Legislature of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulatingthe procedure of the House or either House for the
allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred
to in such address 3***.177. Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a
State shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise totake part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assemblyof the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Sessions of theState Legislature,
prorogation and
dissolution.Right of Governorto address and
send messages to
the House or
Houses.Special addressby the Governor.
1Subs. by the Constitution (First  Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 8, for art. 174.
2Subs. by s. 9, ibid. for ﬁevery sessionﬂ.3The words ﬁand for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the Houseﬂomitted by s. 9,
 ibid.
Rights of Ministersand Advocate-
General as respects
the Houses.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 174Š177.)
86 


 Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the
Legislature of which he may be named a member, but

shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote.Officers of the State Legislature178. Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as
soon as may be, choose two members of the Assembly
to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof
and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another
member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case

may be.179. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy
Speaker of an AssemblyŠ(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be amember of the Assembly;(b) may at any time by writing under his handaddressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the

Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy

Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolutionof the Assembly passed by a majority of all the then
members of the Assembly:Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has
been given of the intention to move the resolution:Provided further that, whenever the Assembly isdissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until
immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after
the dissolution.180. (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the
duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant,

by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may
appoint for the purpose.The Speaker and

Deputy Speaker
of the Legislative
Assembly.
Vacation and
resignation of,
and removal
from, the offices
of Speaker and
Deputy Speaker.
Power of theDeputy Speaker
or other person to
perform the
duties of the
office of, or to
act as, Speaker.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 177Š180.)
87 


 (2) During the absence of the Speaker from anysitting of the Assembly the Deputy Speaker or, if he is

also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such person

is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
181. (1) At any sitting 
of the Legislative Assembly,
while any resolution for the removal of the Speaker from
his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while

any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker,

from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker,

shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions
of clause (2) of article 180 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from
which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy

Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, andotherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal
from office is under consideration in the Assembly and
shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled
to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on

any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.182. The Legislative Council of every State having
such Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two
members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and
Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of
Chairman or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the
Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or
Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.183. A member holding office as Chairman or DeputyChairman of a Legislative CouncilŠ(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be amember of the Council;(b) may at any time by writing under his handaddressed, if such member is the Chairman, to theThe Speaker or
the Deputy
Speaker not to
preside while a
resolution for his
removal from
office is under
consideration.The Chairman andDeputy Chairman
of the Legislative
Council.Vacation and
resignation of, and
removal from, the
offices of Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 180Š183.)
88 


 Deputy Chairman, and if such member is the DeputyChairman, to the Chairman, resign his office; and(c) may be removed from his office by a resolutionof the Council passed by a majority of all the then
members of the Council:Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has
been given of the intention to move the resolution.184. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, the
duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also

vacant, by such member of the Council as the Governor
may appoint for the purpose.(2) During the absence of the Chairman from anysitting of the Council the Deputy Chairman or, if he is

also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person

is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Council, shall act as Chairman.185. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Council,
while any resolution for the removal of the Chairman
from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or
while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the
Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present,
preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply
in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman or, as

the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in,and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Council while any resolution for his removal
from office is under consideration in the Council and
shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled
to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.Power of the
Deputy Chairman
or other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as,
Chairman.The Chairman orthe Deputy
Chairman not to
preside while a
resolution for his

removal from office
is under
consideration.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 183Š185.)
89 


 186. There shall be paid to the Speaker and the DeputySpeaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the Chairman

and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council,
such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed
by the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision
in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as are specified in the Second Schedule.187. (1) The House or each House of the Legislature
of a State shall have a separate secretarial staff:Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the caseof the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council,
be construed as preventing the creation of posts common
to both Houses of such Legislature.(2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate therecruitment, and the conditions of service of persons

appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House or Houses
of the Legislature of the State.(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of theState under clause (2), the Governor may, after

consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case
may be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the Assembly or the Council, and any
rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions
of any law made under the said clause.Conduct of Business188. Every member of the Legislative Assembly or theLegislative Council of a State shall, before taking his seat,
make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person

appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule.189. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, all questions at any sitting of a House of
the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a
majority of votes of the members present and voting,
other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as

such.Salaries and
allowances of the
Speaker and
Deputy Speaker
and the Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman.Secretariat ofState Legislature.Oath or affirmationby members.Voting in Houses,
power of Houses
to act

notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 186Š189.)
90 


 The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such,shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.(2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall havepower to act notwithstanding any vacancy in themembership thereof, and any proceedings in the
Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that
it is discovered subsequently that some person who was
not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part
in the proceedings.(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwiseprovides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of a Houseof the Legislature of a State shall be ten members or one-
tenth of the total number of members of the House,
whichever is greater.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the LegislativeAssembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is noquorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman,or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.Disqualifications of Members190. (1) No person shall be a member of both Houses
of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made

by the Legislature of the State by law for the vacation bya person who is chosen a member of both Houses of hisseat in one house or the other.
(2) No person shall be a member of the Legislaturesof two or more States specified in the First Schedule and
if a person is chosen a member of the Legislatures of
two or more such States, then, at the expiration of suchperiod as may be specified in rules1  made by thePresident, that person's seat in the Legislatures of all
such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the
States.(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of aStateŠ1See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 published with the Ministry
of Law Notification No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India,

Extraordinary, p. 678.
Vacation of seats.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 189Š190.)
91 


 (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualificationsmentioned in 1[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191];or2[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his handaddressed to the speaker or the Chairman, as the
case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,]his seat shall thereupon become vacant:3[Provided that in the case of any resignation referredto in sub-clause (b), if from information received or

otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit,
the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is
satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine,
he shall not accept such resignation.](4) If for a period of sixty days a member of a Houseof the Legislature of a State is without permission of the
House absent from all meetings thereof, the House may
declare his seat vacant:Provided that in computing the said period of sixtydays no account shall be taken of any period during
which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.191. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council of a StateŠ(a) if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State
specified in the First Schedule, other than an office
declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to
disqualify its holder;(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands sodeclared by a competent court;1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 4, for  ﬁclause (1) of
article 191ﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3,  for  sub-clause (
b).3Ins. by s. 3, ibid.
Disqualificationsfor membership.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 190-191.)
92 


 (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarilyacquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under
any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a
foreign State;(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any lawmade by Parliament.1[Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this clause], aperson shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of
any State specified in the First Schedule by reason
only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such

State.2[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a memberof the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]
3[192. (1) If any question arises as to whether a
member of a House of the Legislature of a State has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in clause (1) of article 191, the question shall be referred
for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall
be final. (2) Before giving any decision on any such question,
the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the Election
Commission and shall act according to such opinion.] 193. If a person sits or votes as a member of the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State
before he has complied with the requirements of article
188, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he
is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is
prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law

made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, he1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 5, for  ﬁ(2) For the
purposes of this articleﬂ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3Art. 192 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)Act, 1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,

s. 25 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Decision onquestions as to
disqualifications
of members.Penalty for sittingand voting before
making oath or
affirmation under
article 188 or when
not qualified or
when disqualified.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 191Š193.)
93 


 shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits
or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be
recovered as a debt due to the State.Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures andtheir Members194. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the rules and standing orders regulating the
procedure of the Legislature, there shall be freedom of

speech in the Legislature of every State.
 (2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be
liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of
anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislature
or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable
in respect of the publication by or under the authority of
a House of such a Legislature of any report, paper, votes

or proceedings. (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and
immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and
of the members and the committees of a House of such
Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be
defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined,
1[shall be those of that House and of its members andcommittees immediately before the coming into force of
section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978]. (4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall
apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this
Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature
of a State or any committee thereof as they apply in
relation to members of that Legislature. 195. Members of the Legislative Assembly and the
Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to receive

such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be
determined, by the Legislature of the State by law and,
Powers, privileges,
etc., of the Houses
of Legislatures and
of the members
and committees
thereof.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 26, for certain words(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Salaries andallowances of
members.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 193Š195.)
94 


 until provision in that respect is so made, salaries andallowances at such rates and upon such conditions as
were immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution applicable in the case of members of the
Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.Legislative Procedure196. (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 198 and
207 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills,
a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of
a State which has a Legislative Council.(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198,a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the
Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative
Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses,
either without amendment or with such amendments
only as are agreed to by both Houses. (3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall
not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the House or
Houses thereof. (4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a
State which has not been passed by the Legislative
Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the
Assembly.
 (5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative
Assembly of a State, or which having been passed by
the Legislative Assembly is pending in the Legislative
Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
 197. (1) If after a Bill has been passed by theLegislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative
Council and transmitted to the Legislative CouncilŠ(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or(b) more than three months elapse from the dateon which the Bill is laid before the Council without
the Bill being passed by it; or(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with
amendments to which the Legislative Assembly does
not agree;Provisions as to
introduction and
passing of Bills.Restriction onpowers of
Legislative Council
as to Bills other
than Money Bills.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 195Š197.)
95 


 the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules
regulating its procedure, pass the Bill again in the same

or in any subsequent session with or without such
amendments, if any, as have been made, suggested or

agreed to by the Legislative Council and then transmit
the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council. (2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second
time by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the
Legislative CouncilŠ(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or(b) more than one month elapses from the date onwhich the Bill is laid before the Council without the
Bill being passed by it; or(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with
amendments to which the Legislative Assembly does
not agree;the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by theHouses of the Legislature of the State in the form in
which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the
second time with such amendments, if any, as have been

made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed
to by the Legislative Assembly.
 (3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money
Bill. 198. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council. (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the
Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative
Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council
for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall
within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative
Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative
Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or

any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council. (3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the
recommendations of the Legislative Council, the MoneySpecial procedure
in respect of
Money Bills.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 197Š198.)
96 


 Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houseswith the amendments recommended by the Legislative
Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
 (4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any
of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the
Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments
recommended by the Legislative Council. (5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assemblyand transmitted to the Legislative Council for its
recommendations is not returned to the Legislative
Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall
be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was
passed by the Legislative Assembly.
 199. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall
be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains onlyprovisions dealing with all or any of the following
matters, namely:Š(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alterationor regulation of any tax;(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money orthe giving of any guarantee by the State, or the

amendment of the law with respect to any financial
obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the
State;(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or theContingency Fund of the State, the payment of
moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any
such Fund;(d) the appropriation of moneys out of theConsolidated Fund of the State;(e) the declaring of any expenditure to beexpenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
the State, or the increasing of the amount of any
such expenditure;Definition of
ﬁMoney Billsﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 198-199.)
97 


 (f) the receipt of money on account of theConsolidated Fund of the State or the public account
of the State or the custody or issue of such money; or(g) any matter incidental to any of the mattersspecified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill byreason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment
of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.(3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced inthe Legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council
is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill whenit is transmitted to the Legislative Council under article
198, and when it is presented to the Governor for assent
under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money
Bill.200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a

Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of
the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the
Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom
or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the
President:  Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible
after the presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the
Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message
requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the
Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular,

will consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message and,Assent to Bills.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 199-200.)
98 


 when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shallreconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed

again by the House or Houses with or without
amendment and presented to the Governor for assent,
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:Provided further that the Governor shall not assentto, but shall reserve for the consideration of the President,
any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if
it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High

Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by
this Constitution designed to fill.201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the
consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent therefrom:Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, thePresident may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the
House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the

Legislature of the State together with such a message as
is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when
a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider
it accordingly within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed
by the House or Houses with or without amendment, it
shall be presented again to the President for his
consideration.Procedure in Financial Matters202. (1) The Governor shall in respect of every
financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses
of the Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the State for that year, in this

Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in theannual financial statement shall show separatelyŠ(a) the sums required to meet expendituredescribed by this Constitution as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State;
andBills reserved for
consideration.Annual financialstatement.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 200Š202.)
99 


 (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure
proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund  ofthe State;and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue accountfrom other expenditure.(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditurecharged on the Consolidated Fund of each StateŠ(a) the emoluments and allowances of theGovernor and other expenditure relating to his office;(b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker andthe Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and,in the case of a State having a Legislative Council,also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman ofthe Legislative Council;(c) debt charges for which the State is liableincluding interest, sinking fund charges andredemption charges, and other expenditure relatingto the raising of loans and the service and redemptionof debt;(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries andallowances of Judges of any High Court;(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment,decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;(f) any other expenditure declared by thisConstitution, or by the Legislature of the State bylaw, to be so charged.
203. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of aState shall not be submitted to the vote of the LegislativeAssembly, but nothing in this clause shall be construed
as preventing the discussion in the Legislature of any ofthose estimates.(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to otherexpenditure shall be submitted in the form of demandsfor grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to
assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subjectto a reduction of the amount specified therein.Procedure inLegislature with
respect to
estimates.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 202-203.)
100 


 (3) No demand for a grant shall be made except onthe recommendation of the Governor.
204. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall

be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out
of the Consolidated Fund of the State of all moneys
required to meetŠ(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and(b) the expenditure charged on the ConsolidatedFund of the State but not exceeding in any case the
amount shown in the statement previously laid
before the House or Houses.(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Billin the House or either House of the Legislature of theState which will have the effect of varying the amount oraltering the destination of any grant so made or of varying
the amount of any expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of the State, and the decision of the
person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this clause shall be final.(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206,no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
Fund of the State except under appropriation made bylaw passed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.205. (1) The Governor shallŠ
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made inaccordance with the provisions of article 204 to beexpended for a particular service for the currentfinancial year is found to be insufficient for the
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen
during the current financial year for supplementary
or additional expenditure upon some new service
not contemplated in the annual financial statementfor that year, or
Appropriation Bills.Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 203Š205.)
101 


 (b) if any money has been spent on any serviceduring a financial year in excess of the amount
granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of theLegislature of the State another statement showing the
estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be
presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a

demand for such excess, as the case may be.(2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shallhave effect in relation to any such statement and
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made

authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure
or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect
in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
the State to meet such expenditure or grant.206. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, the Legislative Assembly of a

State shall have powerŠ(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of theestimated expenditure for a part of any financial year
pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
in article 203 for the voting of such grant and the
passing of the law in accordance with the provisions
of article 204 in relation to that expenditure;(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpecteddemand upon the resources of the State when on
account of the magnitude or the indefinite character
of the service the demand cannot be stated with the
details ordinarily given in an annual financial
statement;(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms nopart of the current service of any financial year;and the Legislature of the State shall have power toauthorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from theVotes on account,

votes of credit and
exceptional grants.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 205-206.)
102 


 Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes for whichthe said grants are made.(2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall haveeffect in relation to the making of any grant under clause
(1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with
regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual
financial statement and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.207. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for
any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) ofclause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved

except on the recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill

making such provision shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council:Provided that no recommendation shall be requiredunder this clause for the moving of an amendment
making provision for the reduction or abolition of any
tax.(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to makeprovision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only
that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees
for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that
it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority
or body for local purposes.(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought intooperation, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a
House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor
has recommended to that House the consideration of
the Bill.Procedure Generally208. (1) A House of the Legislature of a State may
make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of
this  Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its

business.Special provisions
as to financial Bills.
Rules of procedure.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 206Š208.)
103 


 (2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules ofprocedure and standing orders in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution with
respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province
shall have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may  be

made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,

or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case
may be.(3) In a State having a Legislative Council theGovernor, after consultation with the Speaker of the

Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative
Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect
to communications between the two Houses.
209. The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose
of the timely completion of financial business, regulate
by law the procedure of, and the conduct of business in,
the House or Houses of the Legislature of the State in
relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the State, and, if and so far as any provision of any
law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the
House or either House of the Legislature of the State
under clause (1) of article 208 or with any rule or standing
order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the
State under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall
prevail.210. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but
subject to the provisions of article 348, business in the
Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official
language or languages of the State or in Hindi or in
English:Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assemblyor Chairman of the Legislative Council, or person acting
as such, as the case may be, may permit any member
who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-
tongue.(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by lawotherwise provides, this article shall, after the expirationRegulation by law
of procedure in the
Legislature of the
State in relation to
financial business.Language to beused in the

Legislature.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 208Š210.)
104 


 of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of
this Constitution, have effect as if the words ﬁor in
Englishﬂ were omitted therefrom:1[Provided that in relation to the  2[Legislatures ofthe States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya

and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for the
words ﬁfifteen yearsﬂ occurring therein, the wordsﬁtwenty-five yearsﬂ were substituted:]3[Provided further that in relation to the
4[Legislatures of the States of  5[Arunachal Pradesh, Goaand Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for thewords ﬁfifteen yearsﬂ occurring therein, the wordsﬁforty yearsﬂ were substituted.] 211. No  discussion shall take place in the Legislatureof a State with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge ofhis duties. 212. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the
Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on
the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.  (2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a Statein whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution
for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to

the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise byhim of those powers.CHAPTER IV.ŠL
EGISLATIVE
 POWER OF THE GOVERNOR213. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislative
Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is aLegislative Council in a State, except when both Houses
Restriction ondiscussion in the
Legislature.Courts not toinquire into
proceedings of the
Legislature.1Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 46 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
2Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
ﬁLegislature of the State of Himachal Pradeshﬂ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
4Subs. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42, for ﬁLegislatureof the State of Mizoramﬂ (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, forﬁArunachal Pradesh and Mizoramﬂ (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
Power ofGovernor to
promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Legislature.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 210Š213.)
105 


 of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfiedthat circumstances exist which render it necessary for
him to take immediate action, he may promulgate
such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to
require:Provided that the Governor shall not, withoutinstructions from the President, promulgate any such

Ordinance ifŠ(a) a Bill containing the same provisions wouldunder this Constitution have required the previous
sanction of the President for the introduction thereof
into the Legislature; or(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reservea Bill containing the same provisions for the
consideration of the President; or(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containingthe same provisions would under this Constitution
have been invalid unless, having been reserved for
the consideration of the President, it had received
the assent of the President.(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shallhave the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature
of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such

OrdinanceŠ(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assemblyof the State, or where there is a Legislative Council
in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease
to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the

reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the
expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it
is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to
by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing

of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the

resolution being agreed to by the Council; and(b) may be withdrawn at any time by theGovernor.
Explanation.ŠWhere the Houses of the LegislatureTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArt. 213.)
106 


 of a State having a Legislative Council are summoned toreassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks
shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the
purposes of this clause.(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this articlemakes any provision which would not be valid if enacted
in an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by
the Governor, it shall be void:
Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions ofthis Constitution relating to the effect of an Act of the
Legislature of a State which is repugnant to an Act of
Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter
enumerated in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance
promulgated under this article in pursuance of
instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an
Act of the Legislature of the State which has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and
assented to by him.1*              *              *              *              *
CHAPTER V.ŠT
HE HIGH COURTS
 IN THE STATES
214. 2*** There shall be a High Court for each State.3*              *              *              *              *
215. Every High Court shall be a court of record and
shall have all the powers of such a court including the
power to punish for contempt of itself.216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice
and such other Judges as the President may from time to
time deem it necessary to appoint.4*              *              *              *              *
High Courts for
States.High Courts to becourts of record.Constitution ofHigh Courts.1Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 27 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2The brackets and figure ﬁ(1)ﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.3Cls. (2) and (3) omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
4Proviso omitted by s. 11,
 ibid
.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 213Š216.)
107 


 217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointedby the President by warrant under his hand and seal
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the
Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of
a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of
the High Court, and  1[shall hold office, in the case of anadditional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224,
and in any other case, until he attains the age of 2[sixty-two years]]:Provided thatŠ(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by thePresident in the manner provided in clause (4) of
article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme
Court;(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by hisbeing appointed by the President to be a Judge of
the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the
President to any other High Court within the territory
of India.(2)A person shall not be qualified for appointment as
a Judge of a High Court unless he is a citizen of India
andŠ(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial officein the territory of India; or(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate ofa High Court 3*** or of two or more such Courts insuccession; 4***4*              *              *              *              *
Appointment and
conditions of the
office of a Judge
of a High Court.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 12, for ﬁshall hold office
until he attains the age of sixty yearsﬂ.2Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for ﬁsixty yearsﬂ.3The words ﬁin any State specified in the First Scheduleﬂ omitted by the Constitution(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.4The word ﬁorﬂ and sub-clause (c) were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-secondAmendment) Act, 1976, s. 36 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-

fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArt. 217.)
108 


 Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this clauseŠ1[(a) in computing the period during which a
person has held judicial office in the territory of India,there shall be included any period, after he has heldany judicial office, during which the person has been
an advocate of a High Court or has held the office
of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the
Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law;]2[(aa)] in computing the period during which aperson has been an advocate of a High Court, thereshall be included any period during which the person3[has held judicial office or the office of a member ofa tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State,
requiring special knowledge of law] after he became
an advocate;(b) in computing the period during which a personhas held judicial office in the territory of India orbeen an advocate of a High Court, there shall beincluded any period before the commencement of
this Constitution during which he has held judicial
office in any area which was comprised before the
fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as definedby the Government of India Act, 1935, or has beenan advocate of any High Court in any such area, as
the case may be. 4[(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judgeof a High Court, the question shall be decided by the
President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and the decision of the President shall be final.]218. The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article
124 shall apply in relation to a High Court as they applyin relation to the Supreme Court with the substitution of
references to the High Court for references to the SupremeCourt.Application ofcertain provisions
relating to Supreme
Court to High
Courts.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Cl. (a) re-lettered as cl. (
aa) by s. 28, ibid
. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,  s. 36, for ﬁhas held
judicial officeﬂ (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4 (with retrospectiveeffect).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 217-218.)
109 


 219. Every person appointed to be a Judge of a High
Court 1*** shall, before he enters upon his office, makeand subscribe before the Governor of the State, or some
person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.2[220. No person who, after the commencement of
this Constitution, has held office as a permanent Judge ofa High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the
other High Courts.Explanation.ŠIn this article, the expression ﬁHighCourtﬂ does not include a High Court for a State specified
in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed beforethe commencement3 of the Constitution (SeventhAmendment) Act, 1956.]221. 4[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of eachHigh Court such salaries as may be determined by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is
so made, such salaries as are specified in the SecondSchedule.](2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowancesand to such rights in respect of leave of absence and
pension as may from time to time be determined by or
under law made by Parliament and, until so determined,

to such allowances and rights as are specified in theSecond Schedule:Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge norhis rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.222. (1) The President may, after consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one HighCourt to any other High Court 5***.Oath oraffirmation by
Judges of High
Courts.Restriction onpractice after being
a permanent Judge.Transfer of a
Judge from one
High Court to
another.
1The words ﬁin a Stateﬁ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by s. 13, ibid
., for art. 220.31st November, 1956.
4Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 3, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
1-4-1986).5The words ﬁwithin the territory of Indiaﬁ omitted by the Constitution (SeventhAmendment) Act, 1956, s. 14.
Salaries, etc., ofJudges.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 219Š222.)
110
 


 1[(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, heshall, during the period he serves, after the commencement
of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, as
a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to receive in
addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as
may be determined by Parliament by law and, until so
determined, such compensatory allowance as the
President may by order fix.]223. When the office of Chief Justice of a High Court
is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason of
absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such
one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may
appoint for the purpose.2[224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in thebusiness of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work
therein, it appears to the President that the number of the
Judges of that Court should be for the time being
increased, the President may appoint duly qualified
persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such
period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
 (2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the
Chief Justice is by reason of absence or for any other
reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is
appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, the

President may appoint a duly qualified person to act as
a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge has
resumed his duties. (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting
Judge of a High Court shall hold office after attaining the
age of 3[sixty-two years].]4[224A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State may at
any time, with the previous consent of the President,Appointment of

acting Chief Justice.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5. Original cl. (2) wasomitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14.2Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 15, for art. 224.3Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 6, for ﬁsixty yearsﬂ.4Ins. by s. 7, ibid.Appointment ofadditional and
acting Judges.Appointment ofretired Judges at
sittings of  High

Courts.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 222Š224
A.)111 


 request any person who has held the office of a Judge of
that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as aJudge of the High Court for that State, and every such
person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be
entitled to such allowances as the President may by order
determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and
privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, aJudge of that High Court:Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemedto require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as
a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do.]225. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution andto the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature
made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature
by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the lawadministered in, any existing High Court, and therespective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
administration of justice in the Court, including any
power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings
of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in
Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution:1[Provided that any restriction to which the exerciseof original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts withrespect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning
any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was
subject immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such
jurisdiction.]2[226. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32 
3***every High Court shall have power, throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate
cases, any Government, within those territories directions,
Jurisdiction ofexisting High
Courts.Power of HighCourts to issue
certain writs.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 29, (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). Original proviso was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38, for art. 226(w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3The words, figures and letters ﬁbut subject to the provisions of article 131A and article226Aﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7 (w.e.f.

13-4-1978).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 224
AŠ226.)112
 


 orders or writs, including 1[writs in the nature of habeascorpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari,or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.] (2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue
directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority
or person may also be exercised by any High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within
which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the
exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the seat of

such Government or authority or the residence of such
person is not within those territories.2[(3) Where any party against whom an interim order,
whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other
manner, is made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a

petition under clause (1), withoutŠ(a)  furnishing to such party copies of such petitionand all documents in support of the plea for such
interim order; and(b)  giving such party an opportunity of being
heard,makes an application to the High Court for the vacationof such order and furnishes a copy of such application
to the party in whose favour such order has been made
or the counsel of such party, the High Court shall dispose

of the application within a period of two weeks from the
date on which it is received or from the date on which
the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever
is later, or where the High Court is closed on the last

day of that period, before the expiry of the next day
afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall,
on the expiry of that period, or, as the case may be, the

expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.]
1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30, for the portionbeginning with the words ﬁwrits in the nauture of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quowarranto and certiorari, or any of themﬂ and ending with the words ﬁsuch illegality hasresulted in substantial failure of justiceﬂ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for cls. (3), (4), (5) and (6) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 226.)
113
 


 1[(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this
article shall not be in derogation of the power conferredon the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.]2226A. [Constitutional validity of Central laws not to beconsidered in proceedings under article 226.] Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).227. 3[(1) Every High Court shall havesuperintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout
the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.](2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, the High Court mayŠ
(a) call for returns from such courts;(b) make and issue general rules and prescribeforms for regulating the practice and proceedings ofsuch courts; and(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries andaccounts shall be kept by the officers of any suchcourts.(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees tobe allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers of
such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders
practising therein:Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or
tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be
inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time
being in force, and shall require the previous approval of
the Governor.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to conferon a High Court powers of superintendence over any
court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relatingto the Armed Forces.Power ofsuperintendence
over all courts by
the High Court.1Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3Cl. (1) has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,

s. 31, to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 226-227.)
114
 


 1*              *              *              *              *
228. If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending
in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial question
of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the
determination of which is necessary for the disposal of

the case,  2[it shall withdraw the case and 3*** mayŠ](a) either dispose of the case itself, or(b) determine the said question of law and returnthe case to the court from which the case has been
so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment
on such question, and the said court shall on receipt
thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity
with such judgment.4228A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questionsrelating to constitutional validity of State laws.] Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, 
s. 10 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).229. (1)  Appointments of officers and servants of a
High Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of the
Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he
may direct:Provided that the Governor of the State  5*** may byrule require that in such cases as may be specified in the
rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be
appointed to any office connected with the Court save
after consultation with the State Public Service
Commission.(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by theLegislature of the State, the conditions of service ofTransfer of certain

cases to High
Court.Officers andservants and the
expenses of High
Courts.1Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f.
1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 1976, s. 41, for ﬁit shallwithdraw the case and may Šﬂ (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3The words, figures and letters ﬁsubject to the provisions of article 131A,ﬁ omitted bythe Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
4Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5The words ﬁin which the High Court has its principal seatﬂ omitted by the Constitution(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and  Sch.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 227Š229.)
115
 


 officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as
may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice ofthe Court or by some other Judge or officer of the Courtauthorised by the Chief Justice to make rules for thepurpose:Provided that the rules made under this clause shall,so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave orpensions, require the approval of the Governor of the
State 1***.(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court,including all salaries, allowances and pensions payableto or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court,
shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State,and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shallform part of that Fund.
2[230. (1) Parliament may by law extend thejurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdictionof a High Court from, any Union territory.
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercisesjurisdiction in relation to a Union territory,Š
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construedas empowering the Legislature of the State to increase,
restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governorshall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for
subordinate courts in that territory, be construed as
a reference to the President.231. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
preceding provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by

law establish a common High Court for two or moreStates or for two or more States and a Union territory.
(2) In relation to any such High Court,Š(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor ofthe State shall be construed as a reference to theGovernors of all the States in relation to which theHigh Court exercises jurisdiction;
Extension ofjurisdiction of
High Courts to
Union territories.Establishment of
a common High
Court for two or
more States.1The words ﬁin which the High Court has its principal seatﬂ omitted by the Constitution(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and  Sch.
2Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for arts. 230, 231 and 232.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 229Š231.)
116
 


 (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor
shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables forsubordinate courts, be construed as a reference to
the Governor of the State in which the subordinate
courts are situate; and(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to theState shall be construed as a reference to the State inwhich the High Court has its principal seat:Provided that if such principal seat is in a Unionterritory, the references in articles 219 and 229 to the

Governor, Public Service Commission, Legislature and
Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construedrespectively as references to the President, Union Public
Service Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund
of India.]CHAPTER VI.ŠSUBORDINATE
 COURTS
233. (1) Appointments of persons to be, and the postingand promotion of, district judges in any State shall be
made by the Governor of the State in consultation with
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to suchState.(2) A person not already in the service of the Unionor of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a
district judge if he has been for not less than seven years

an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by theHigh Court for appointment. 1[233A. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree ororder of any court,Š(a) (i) no appointment of any person already inthe judicial service of a State or of any person whohas been for not less than seven years an advocate
or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and
(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any suchperson as a district judge,made at any time before the commencement of theConstitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966,
Validation of
appointments of,
and judgments,
etc., delivered by,

certain district

judges.1Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth  Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.
Appointment ofdistrict judges.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 231Š233
A.)117
 


 otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of
article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal orvoid or ever to have become illegal or void by reasononly of the fact that such appointment, posting,promotion or transfer was not made in accordance with
the said provisions;](b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree,sentence or order passed or made, and no other act
or proceeding done or taken, before thecommencement of the Constitution (Twentieth
Amendment) Act, 1966 by, 
or before, any person
appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as adistrict judge in any State otherwise than inaccordance with the provisions of article 233 or
article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid orever to have become illegal or invalid by reason onlyof the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion
or transfer was not made in accordance with the saidprovisions.]234. Appointments of persons other than district
judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by
the Governor of the State in accordance with rules madeby him in that behalf after consultation with the StatePublic Service Commission and with the High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.235. The control over district courts and courts
subordinate thereto including the posting and promotionof, and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the
judicial service of a State and holding any post inferiorto the post of district judge shall be vested in the HighCourt, but nothing in this article shall be construed as
taking away from any such person any right of appealwhich he may have under the law regulating theconditions of his service or as authorising the High Court
to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with theconditions of his service prescribed under such law.
236. In this ChapterŠ
(a) the expression "district judge" includes judgeof a city civil court, additional district judge, jointdistrict judge, assistant district judge, chief judge ofRecruitment ofpersons other than
district judges to
the judicial service.Control oversubordinate courts.Interpretation.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 233
AŠ236.)118
 


 a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate,additional chief presidency magistrate, sessionsjudge, additional sessions judge and assistantsessions Judge;(b) the expression ﬁjudicial serviceﬂ means aservice consisting exclusively of persons intended to
fill the post of district judge and other civil judicialposts inferior to the post of district judge.
237. The Governor may by public notification direct
that the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any
rules made thereunder shall with effect from such date as
may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in relation to
any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they
apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial
service of the State subject to such exceptions and
modifications as may be specified in the notification.Application  of the

provisions of  this

Chapter to certain
class or classes of
magistrates.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe States.ŠArts. 236-237.)
119
 


 Part VII.Š[The States in Part B of the FirstSchedule.] Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, 
s. 29 
and Sch.120 


 PART VIII
 1[THE UNION TERRITORIES]2[239. (1) Save as otherwise provided by Parliamentby law, every Union territory shall be administered by the

President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through
an administrator to be appointed by him with such
designation as he may specify.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI,the President may appoint the Governor of a State as the
administrator of an adjoining Union territory, and where

a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions
as such administrator independently of his Council of
Ministers.3[239A. (1) Parliament may by law create 4[for theUnion territory of 5[Puducherry]]Š(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated
and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the
Union territory, or
(b) a Council of Ministers,or both with such constitution, powers and functions, ineach case, as may be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shallnot be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect of
amending this Constitution.]
6[239AA. (1) As from the date of commencement ofthe Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the
Union territory of Delhi shall be called the NationalAdministration of
Union territories.Creation of localLegislatures or
Council of
Ministers or both
for certain Union
territories.Special provisionswith respect to
Delhi.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for the headingﬁTHE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULEﬁ.
2Subs. by  s. 17,
 ibid
., for arts. 239 and 240.3Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 4.
4Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for ﬁforany of the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherryﬂ(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, forﬁPondicherryﬁ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
6Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1992).
121 


 Capital Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred
to as the National Capital Territory) and the administrator

thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated
as the Lieutenant Governor.
(2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for theNational Capital Territory and the seats in such Assembly

shall be filled by members chosen by direct election from
territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory.
(b) The total number of seats in the LegislativeAssembly, the number of seats reserved for Scheduled

Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into

territorial constituencies (including the basis for such
division) and all other matters relating to the functioning

of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law
made by Parliament.(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shallapply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the

Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory

and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a

State, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members
thereof respectively; and any reference in articles 326 and
329 to ﬁappropriate Legislatureﬂ shall be deemed to be a
reference to Parliament.(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,the Legislative Assembly shall have power to make laws
for the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory

with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the
State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such
matter is applicable to Union territories except matters
with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and
Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate
to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from thepowers of Parliament under this Constitution to make
laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or
any part thereof.(c) If any provision of a law made by the LegislativeAssembly with respect to any matter is repugnant to anyTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArt. 239
AA.)122 


 provision of a law made by Parliament with respect tothat matter, whether passed before or after the law made

by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other

than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in

either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case

may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made

by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the
repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the LegislativeAssembly has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and has received his assent, such law shall
prevail in the National Capital Territory:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall
prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any law
with respect to the same matter including a law adding
to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by
the Legislative Assembly.
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consistingof not more than ten per cent. of the total number of
members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief

Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant
Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to
matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly
has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinionbetween the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on

any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the

President for decision and act according to the decision
given thereon by the President and pending such decision
it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any
case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that

it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take
such action or to give such direction in the matter as he

deems necessary.
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by thePresident and other Ministers shall be appointed by
the President on the advice of the Chief Minister and theTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArt. 239
AA.)123 


 Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of thePresident.(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectivelyresponsible to the Legislative Assembly.
1[(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for
giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions contained
in the foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or
consequential thereto.2[(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a)shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this
Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which
amends or has the effect of amending, this Constitution.](8) The  provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may
be, apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the

Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as

they apply in relation to the Union territory of3[Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature,respectively; and any reference in that article to
ﬁclause (1) of article 239Aﬂ shall be deemed to be a
reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may
be.239AB. If  the President, on receipt of a report from
the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise, is satisfiedŠ(a) that a situation has arisen in which theadministration of the National Capital Territory

cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in
pursuance of that article; or(b) that for the proper administration of theNational Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient

so to do,the President may by order suspend the operation of anyprovision of article 239AA or of all or any of the1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3, for ﬁ(7)ﬂ (w.e.f.
21-12-1991).2Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
3Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, forﬁPondicherryﬁ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
Provision in caseof failure of
constitutional
machinery.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArts. 239
AA-239AB.)124 


 provisions of any law made in pursuance of that articlefor such period and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in such law and make such incidental and
consequential provisions as may appear to him to be
necessary or expedient for administering the National
Capital Territory in accordance with the provisions of

article 239 and article 239AA.1[239B. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislatureof 2[the Union territory of 3[Puducherry]] is in session, theadministrator thereof is satisfied that circumstances exist
which render it necessary for him to take immediate
action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the
circumstances appear to him to require:Provided that no such Ordinance shall bepromulgated by the administrator except after obtaining
instructions from the President in that behalf:Provided further that whenever the said Legislatureis dissolved, or its functioning remains suspended on

account of any action taken under any such law as is
referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the administrator
shall not promulgate any Ordinance during the period
of such dissolution or suspension.(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article inpursuance of instructions from the President shall be
deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union
territory which has been duly enacted after complying
with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such
law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, but
every such OrdinanceŠ
(a) shall be laid before the Legislature of theUnion territory and shall cease to operate at the1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f.
30-12-1971).2Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for ﬁaUnion territory referred to in clause (1) of article 239Aﬂ(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
3Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, forﬁPondicherryﬁ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
Power ofadministrator to
promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Legislature.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArts. 239
AB-239B.)125 


 expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of theLegislature or if, before the expiration of that period,a resolution disapproving it is passed by theLegislature, upon the passing of the resolution; and(b) may be withdrawn at any time by theadministrator after obtaining instructions from thePresident in that behalf.(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this articlemakes any provision which would not be valid if enactedin an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory madeafter complying with the provisions in that behalfcontained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1)of article 239A, it shall be void.]1*                   *                           *                               *
240.  (1) The President may make regulations for the
peace, progress and good government of the Unionterritory ofŠ(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;2[(b) Lakshadweep;]3[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;]4[(d) Daman and Diu;]5[(e) Puducherry;]6***7***:8[Provided that when any body is created under article239A to function as a Legislature for the  
9[Union territoryPower ofPresident to make
regulations for
certain Union
territories.1Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4(retrospectively) and omitted by the Consititution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 32 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973(34 of 1973), s. 4, for entry (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
3Ins. by the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 3.
4Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, forentry (d) (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). Entry (
d) was ins. by the Constitution (Twelfth Amendment)
Act, 1962, s. 3.5Subs. by The Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, forﬁPondicherryﬂ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
6The entry (f) relating to Mizoram omitted by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
7The entry (g) relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of Arunachal PradeshAct, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
8Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5.
9Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for ﬁUnion
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu or Pondicherryﬂ (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArts. 239
B-240.)126 


 1Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, forﬁPondicherryﬁ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f.
15-2-1972).3Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for ﬁany existing lawﬂ(w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
4Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ﬁStatespecified in Part C of the First Scheduleﬂ.5Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid
., for ﬁsuch Stateﬂ.6Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., 
ibid., for cls. (3) and (4).of 1[Puducherry], the President shall not make any
regulation for the peace, progress and good governmentof that Union territory with effect from the date appointed
for the first meeting of the Legislature:]2[Provided further that whenever the bodyfunctioning as a Legislature for the Union territory of1[Puducherry] is dissolved, or the functioning of that bodyas such Legislature remains suspended on account of
any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the

period of such dissolution or suspension, makeregulations for the peace, progress and good governmentof that Union territory.]
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amendany Act made by Parliament or 3[any other law] which isfor the time being applicable to the Union territoryand, when promulgated by the President, shall have thesame force and effect as an Act of Parliament which
applies to that territory.]
241. (1) Parliament may by law constitute a High
Court for a 4[Union territory] or declare any court in any5[such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of thepurposes of this Constitution.(2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall applyin relation to every High Court referred to in clause (1) asthey apply in relation to a High Court referred to in
article 214 subject to such modifications or exceptions as
Parliament may by law provide.6[(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitutionand to the provisions of any law of the appropriate
High Courts forUnion territories.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArts. 240-241.)
127 


 Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on thatLegislature by or under this Constitution, every
High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall continue
to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory
after such commencement.(4) Nothing in this article derogates from the powerof Parliament to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a
High Court for a State to, or from, any Union territory or

part thereof.]242. [Coorg.] Rep. by the Constitution (SeventhAmendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part VI.ŠThe Union territories.ŠArts. 241
-242.)128 


 1[PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243. In this Part, unless the context otherwiserequires,Š(a) ﬁdistrictﬂ means a district in a State;(b) ﬁGram Sabhaﬂ means a body consisting of
persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a
village comprised within the area of Panchayat at
the village level;(c) ﬁintermediate levelﬂ means a level betweenthe village and district levels specified by the
Governor of a State by public notification to be the
intermediate level for the purposes of this Part;(d) ﬁPanchayatﬂ means an institution (bywhatever name called) of self-government
constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas;(e) ﬁPanchayat areaﬂ means the territorial area of
a Panchayat;(f) ﬁpopulationﬂ means the population asascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published;(g) ﬁvillageﬂ means a village specified by theGovernor by public notification to be a village for
the purposes of this Part and includes a group of
villages so specified.243A. A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and
perform such functions at the village level as the
Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
243B. (1) There shall be constituted in every State,Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels
in accordance with the provisions of this Part.129Definitions.Gram Sabha.Constitution ofPanchayats.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
Original Part IX was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch. 


 (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1),Panchayats at the intermediate level may not be
constituted in a State having a population not exceeding
twenty lakhs.243C. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, theLegislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with

respect to the composition of Panchayats:
Provided that the ratio between the population ofthe territorial area of a Panchayat at any level and the
number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
State.(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled bypersons chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this purpose,
each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the
population of each constituency and the number of seatsallotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the Panchayat area.(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for
the representationŠ(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at thevillage level, in the Panchayats at the intermediate
level or, in the case of a State not having Panchayats

at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the
district level;(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at theintermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district
level;(c) of the members of the House of the People andthe members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
representing constituencies which comprise wholly
or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the
village level, in such Panchayat;(d) of  the members of the Council of States and
the members of the Legislative Council of theComposition of
Panchayats.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
B-243C.)130 


 State, where they are registered as electors withinŠ(i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level,in Panchayat at the intermediate level;(ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, inPanchayat at the district level.(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and othermembers of a Panchayat whether or not chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat
area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the
Panchayats.(5) The Chairperson ofŠ(a) a panchayat at the village level shall be electedin such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by

law, provide; and
(b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or districtlevel shall be elected by, and from amongst, the

elected members thereof.243D.  (1) Seats shall be reserved forŠ(a) the Scheduled Castes; and(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reservedshall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to

the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in
that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes
in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that

Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Panchayat.(2) Not less than one-third of the total number ofseats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case

may be,  the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number ofseats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
Reservation of
seats.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
C-243D.)131 


 seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayatshall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Panchayat.(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayatsat the village or any other level shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in

such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,

provide:Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersonsreserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall

bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the

total number of such offices in the Panchayats at each
level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the

total population of the State:Provided further that not less than one-third of thetotal number of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats
at each level shall be reserved for women:Provided also that the number of offices reservedunder this clause shall be allotted by rotation to different
Panchayats at each level.(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2)and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than
the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in
article 334.(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislatureof a State from making any provision for reservation of
seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the
Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of
citizens.243E. (1) Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolvedunder any law for the time being in force, shall continue
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting
and no longer.
Duration of
Panchayats, etc.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
D-243E.)132 


  (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in
force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of aPanchayat at any level, which is functioning immediately
before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration
specified in clause (1). (3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be
completedŠ(a) before the expiry of its duration specified inclause (1);(b) before the expiration of a period of six monthsfrom the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is
less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any
election under this clause for constituting the Panchayatfor such period. (4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of
a Panchayat before the expiration of its duration shall
continue only for the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved. 243F. 
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of a PanchayatŠ(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law forthe time being in force for the purposes of elections
to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified onthe ground that he is less than twenty-five years ofage, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years;(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any lawmade by the Legislature of the State.(2) If any question arises as to whether a member ofa Panchayat has become subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question
shall be referred for the decision of such authority and insuch manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide. 243G. 
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the
Disqualificationsfor membership.Powers, authorityand responsibilities
of Panchayats.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
EŠ243G.)133 


 Panchayats with such powers and authority as may benecessary to enable them to function as institutions of

self-government and such law may contain provisions
for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect toŠ(a) the preparation of plans for economicdevelopment and social justice;(b) the implementation of schemes for economic
development and social justice as may be entrusted
to them including those in relation to the matters
listed in the Eleventh Schedule.243H. The Legislature of a State may, by law,Š
(a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and
appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in
accordance with such procedure and subject to such
limits;(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tollsand fees levied and collected by the State Government
for such purposes and subject to such conditions
and limits;(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to thePanchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State;
and(d) provide for constitution of such Funds forcrediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on

behalf of the Panchayats and also for the withdrawal
of such moneys therefrom,as may be specified in the law.
243-I. (1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as
may be within one year from the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992,
and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year,

constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial
position of the Panchayats and to make recommendationsPowers to impose
taxes by, and Funds

of, the Panchayats.Constitution of
Finance
Commission to
review financial

position.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
GŠ243-I.)134 


 to the Governor as toŠ(a) the principles which should governŠ(i) the distribution between the State and thePanchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties,
tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of
their respective shares of such proceeds;(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tollsand fees which may be assigned to, or

appropriated by, the Panchayats;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats fromthe Consolidated Fund of the State;(b) the measures needed to improve the financialposition of the Panchayats;(c) any other matter referred to the FinanceCommission by the Governor in the interests of
sound finance of the Panchayats.(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide
for the composition of the Commission, the qualifications
which shall be requisite for appointment as members
thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.(3) The Commission shall determine their procedureand shall have such powers in the performance of their
functions as the Legislature of the State may, by law,

confer on them.(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendationmade by the Commission under this article together with
an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.243J. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts
by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.243K. (1) The superintendence, direction and controlof the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct

of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested inAudit of accounts
of Panchayats.Elections to thePanchayats.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
-IŠ243K.)135 


 a State Election Commission consisting of a State ElectionCommissioner to be appointed by the Governor.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by theLegislature of a State, the conditions of service and tenure
of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such
as the Governor may by rule determine:Provided that the State Election Commissioner shallnot be removed from his office except in like manner
and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and
the conditions of service of the State Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requestedby the State Election Commission, make available to the
State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary
for the discharge of the functions conferred on the State
Election Commission by clause (1).(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, theLegislature of a State may, by law, make provision with

respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with,
elections to the Panchayats.243L. The provisions of this Part shall apply to theUnion territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor

of a State were references to the Administrator of the
Union territory appointed under article 239 and references
to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State
were references, in relation to a Union territory having a
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public
notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall
apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject to
such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in
the notification.243M.  (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to theScheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.Application to
Union territories.Part not to applyto certain areas.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
KŠ243M.)136 


 (2) Nothing in this Part shall apply toŠ(a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya andMizoram;(b)  the hill areas in the State of Manipur for whichDistrict Councils exist under any law for the time
being in force.(3) Nothing in this PartŠ(a)  relating to Panchayats at the district level shallapply to the hill areas of the District of Darjeeling in
the State of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha

Hill Council exists under any law for the time being
in force;
(b) shall be construed to affect the functions andpowers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
constituted under such law.
1[(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservationof seats for the Scheduled Castes, shall apply to the State
of Arunachal Pradesh.](4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,Š(a)  the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) may, by law, extend this part
to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to in

clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the
total membership of that House and by a majority of
not less than two-thirds of the members of that House
present and voting;(b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions
of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in
such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an

amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.243N. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, anyprovision of any law relating to Panchayats in force in aContinuance of
existing laws and
Panchayats.1Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 2000,  s. 2.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
M-243N.)137 


 State immediately before the commencement of theConstitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which
is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall
continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority or
until the expiration of one year from such commencement,
whichever is earlier:Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediatelybefore such commencement shall continue till the
expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by
a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative
Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a

Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of
that State.243-O.  Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) the validity of any law relating to thedelimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 243K, shall not be called in
question in any court;(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called inquestion except by an election petition presented to
such authority and in such manner as is provided
for by or under any law made by the Legislature of
a State.]Bar to interference
by courts in
electoral matters.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IX.ŠThe Panchayats.ŠArts. 243
N-243-O.)138 


 1[PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. 
In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,Š(a) ﬁCommitteeﬂ means a Committee constitutedunder article 243S;(b) ﬁdistrictﬂ means a district in a State;(c) ﬁMetropolitan areaﬂ means an area having apopulation of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one
or more districts and consisting of two or more
Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous
areas, specified by the Governor by public
notification to be a Metropolitan area for the purposesof this Part;
(d) ﬁMunicipal areaﬂ means the territorial area ofa Municipality as is notified by the Governor;(e) ﬁMunicipalityﬂ means an institution of self-government constituted under article 243Q;(f) ﬁPanchayatﬂ means a Panchayat constitutedunder article 243B;(g) ﬁpopulationﬂ means the population asascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published.243Q. (1) There shall be constituted in every State,Š(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called)for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in

transition  from a rural area to an urban area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area;and(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urbanarea,139Constitution ofMunicipalities.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992,  s. 2  (w.e.f 1-6-1993).
Definitions. 


 in accordance with the provisions of this Part:Provided that a Municipality under this clause maynot be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as
the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area

and the municipal services being provided or proposed
to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area
and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public
notification, specify to be an industrial township.(2) In this article, ﬁa transitional areaﬂ, ﬁa smallerurban areaﬂ or ﬁa larger urban areaﬂ means such area as
the Governor may, having regard to the population of the

area, the density of the population therein, the revenue
generated for local administration, the percentage of
employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic

importance or such other factors as he may deem fit,
specify by public notification for the purposes of this
Part.243R. (1) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seatsin a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from the territorial constituencies in the
Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal area
shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known
as wards.(2) The Legislature of a State ma
y, by law, provideŠ
(a) for the representation in a Municipality ofŠ(i) persons having special knowledge orexperience in Municipal administration;(ii) the members of the House of the Peopleand the members of the Legislative Assembly of
the State representing constituencies which
comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area;(iii) the members of the Council of States andthe members of the Legislative Council of the
State registered as electors within the Municipal
area;(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committeesconstituted under clause (5) of article 243S:Composition of
Municipalities.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243Q-243R.)140 


 Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph
(i) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings ofthe Municipality;(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson ofa Municipality.
243S. (1) There shall be constituted Wards
Committees, consisting of one or more wards, withinthe territorial area of a Municipality having a population
of three lakhs or more.(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect toŠ(a) the composition and the territorial area of aWards Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards
Committee shall be filled.(3) A member of a Municipality representing a wardwithin the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall
be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists ofŠ
(a) one ward, the member representing that wardin the Municipality; or(b) two or more wards, one of the membersrepresenting such wards in the Municipality electedby the members of the Wards Committee,
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to preventthe Legislature of a State from making any provision for
the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards
Committees.243T. 
(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality
and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly

as may be, the same proportion to the total number ofseats to be filled by direct election in that Municipalityas the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Municipal area bears to the total population of that areaand such seats may be allotted by rotation to differentconstituencies in a Municipality.
Constitution and
composition of
Wards Committees,

etc.Reservation ofseats.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243RŠ243T.)141 


 (2) Not less than one-third of the total number ofseats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case

may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number ofseats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of

seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalitiesshall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of

a State may, by law, provide.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2)and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than
the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in
article 334.(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislatureof a State from making any provision for reservation of
seats in any Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in
the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens.243U. (1) Every Municipality, unless sooner dissolved
under any law for the time being in force, shall continue
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting
and no longer:Provided that a Municipality shall be given areasonable opportunity of being heard before its
dissolution.(2) No amendment of any law for the time being inforce shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a
Municipality at any level, which is functioning
immediately before such amendment, till the expiration
of its duration specified in clause (1).Duration of
Municipalities,
etc.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243T-243U.)142 


 (3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be
completed,Š(a) before the expiry of its duration specified inclause (1);(b) before the expiration of a period of six monthsfrom the date of its dissolution:Provided that where the remainder of the period forwhich the dissolved Municipality would have continued
is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold
any election under this clause for constituting the
Municipality for such period.(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolutionof a Municipality before the expiration of its duration

shall continue only for the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Municipality would have continued
under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.243V. 
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of a MunicipalityŠ(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law forthe time being in force for the purposes of elections
to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified onthe ground that he is less than twenty-five years ofage, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years;(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any lawmade by the Legislature of the State.(2) If any question arises as to whether a member ofa Municipality has become subject to any of thedisqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question
shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,

provide.243W. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,the Legislature of a State may, by law, endowŠ
(a) the Municipalities with such powers andauthority as may be necessary to enable them to
function as institutions of self-government and such
law may contain provisions for the devolution ofpowers and  responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein,
Disqualificationsfor membership.Powers, authorityand responsibilities
of Municipalities,
etc.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243UŠ243W.)143 


 with respect toŠ(i) the preparation of plans for economicdevelopment and social justice;(ii) the performance of functions and theimplementation of schemes as may be entrusted to
them including those in relation to the matters
listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers andauthority as may be necessary to enable them to carry
out the responsibilities conferred upon them
including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule.
243X. The Legislature of a State may, by law,Š
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and
appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in
accordance with such procedure and subject to such
limits;(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties,tolls and fees levied and collected by the State
Government for such purposes and subject to such
conditions and limits;(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to theMunicipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the
State; and(d) provide for constitution of such Funds forcrediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on

behalf of the Municipalities and also for the
withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,as may be specified in the law.
243Y. 
(1) The Finance Commission constituted underarticle 243-I shall also review the financial position of the
Municipalities and make recommendations to the
Governor as toŠ(a) the principles which should governŠ(i) the distribution between the State and theMunicipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes,Power to impose
taxes by, and Funds

of, the
Municipalities.FinanceCommission.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243WŠ243Y.)144 


 duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, whichmay be divided between them under this Part

and the allocation between the Municipalities at
all levels of their respective shares of such
proceeds;(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tollsand fees which may be assigned to, or
appropriated by, the Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities
from the Consolidated Fund of the State;(b) the measures needed to improve the financialposition of the Municipalities;(c) any other matter referred to the FinanceCommission by the Governor in the interests of
sound finance of the Municipalities.(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendationmade by the Commission under this article together withan explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.243Z. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts
by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.243ZA. (1) The superintendence, direction and controlof the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct

of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in
the State Election Commission referred to in article 243K.(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, theLegislature of a State may, by law, make provision with

respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with,
elections to the Municipalities.243ZB. The provisions of this Part shall apply to theUnion territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor

of a State were references to the Administrator of the
Union territory appointed under article 239 and references
to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State
were references in relation to a Union territory having aAudit of accounts
of Municipalities.Elections to theMunicipalities.Application toUnion territories.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243YŠ243ZB.)145 


 Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public
notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shallapply to any Union territory or part thereof subject tosuch exceptions and modifications as he may specify in
the notification.243ZC. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to theScheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribalareas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affectthe functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha HillCouncil constituted under any law for the time being in
force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in theState of West Bengal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this

Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referredto in clause (1) subject to such exceptions andmodifications as may be specified in such law, and no

such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of thisConstitution for the purposes of article 368.243ZD. (1) There shall be constituted in every Stateat the district level a District Planning Committee to
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats andthe Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draftdevelopment plan for the district as a whole.(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect toŠ(a) the composition of the District PlanningCommittees;(b) the manner in which the seats in suchCommittees shall be filled:Provided that not less than four-fifths of the totalnumber of members of such Committee shall be
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members
of the Panchayat at the district level and of the
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio
Part not to applyto certain areas.Committee fordistrict planning.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243ZBŠ243ZD.)146 


 between the population of the rural areas and of theurban areas in the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning whichmay be assigned to such Committees;(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of suchCommittees shall be chosen.(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, inpreparing the draft development plan,Š(a)  have regard toŠ
(i) matters of common interest between thePanchayats and the Municipalities including
spatial planning, sharing of water and otherphysical and natural resources, the integrateddevelopment of infrastructure and environmental
conservation;(ii) the extent and type of available resources
whether financial or otherwise;(b) consult such institutions and organisations asthe Governor  may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District PlanningCommittee shall forward the development plan, as
recommended by such Committee, to the Governmentof the State.243ZE. (1) There shall be constituted in every
Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee toprepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitanarea as a whole.(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect toŠ(a) the composition of the Metropolitan PlanningCommittees;(b) the manner in which the seats in such
Committees shall be filled:Provided that not less than two-thirds of themembers of such Committee shall be elected by,
and from amongst, the elected members of the
Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats inthe Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio
Committee forMetropolitan
planning.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243ZD-243ZE.)147 


 between the population of the Municipalities and of thePanchayats in that area;(c) the representation in such Committees of theGovernment of India and the Government of the State
and of such organisations and Institutions as may be
deemed necessary for carrying out the functions
assigned to such Committees;(d) the functions relating to planning andcoordination for the Metropolitan area which may
be assigned to such Committees;(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of suchCommittees shall be chosen. (3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, inpreparing the draft development plan,Š(a) have regard toŠ(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalitiesand the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;(ii) matters of common interest between theMunicipalities and the Panchayats, including
co-ordinated  spatial planning of the area, sharing

of water and other physical and natural resources,
the integrated development of infrastructure and
environmental conservation;(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set bythe Government of India and the Government of
the State;(iv) the extent and nature of investments likelyto be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies

of the Government of India and of the Government
of the State and other available resources whether
financial or otherwise;(b) consult such institutions and organisations asthe Governor may, by order, specify.
 (4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning
Committee shall forward the development plan, as

recommended by such Committee, to the Government of
the State.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArt. 243ZE.)148 


  243ZF. 
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, anyprovision of any law relating to Municipalities in force
in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992,
which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part,
shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority
or until the expiration of one year from such
commencement, whichever is earlier:Provided that all the Municipalities existingimmediately before such commencement shall continue
till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the
Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a

State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the
Legislature of that State.243ZG. Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) the validity of any law relating to thedelimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 243ZA shall not be called in
question in any court;(b) no election to any Municipality shall be calledin question except by an election petition presented
to such authority and in such manner as is provided
for by or under any law made by the Legislature of
a State.]Continuance of
existing laws and
Municipalities.Bar to interferenceby courts in
electoral matters.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part IXA.ŠThe Municipalities.ŠArts. 243ZF-243ZG.)149 


 PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. (1) The provisions of the Fifth Schedule shallapply to the administration and control of the Scheduled
Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State 
1*** other  than
2[the States of Assam 
3[,4[Meghalaya, Tripura and
Mizoram]]]. (2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply
to the administration of the tribal areas in 2[the States ofAssam 3[, 5[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]]].
 6[244A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, Parliament may, by law, form within the

State of Assam an autonomous State comprising (whether
wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified
in 7[Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of theSixth Schedule and create thereforŠ(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated
and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for
the autonomous State, or(b) a Council of Ministers,or both with such constitution, powers and functions, ineach case, as may be specified in the law.
150Administration ofScheduled Areas
and Tribal Areas.
1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, forﬁthe State of Assamﬂ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for ﬁand Meghalayaﬂ
(w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
4Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for ﬁMeghalaya and
Tripuraﬂ (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for ﬁMeghalaya and Tripura and the Union Territory of
Mizoramﬂ(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 2.
7Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, forﬁPart Aﬂ (w
.e.f. 21-1-1972).Formation of anautonomous State

comprising certain
tribal areas in
Assam and creation
of local Legislature
or Council ofMinisters or boththerefor.
 


  (2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may,
in particular,Š
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State
List or the Concurrent List with respect to which the
Legislature of the autonomous State shall have power
to make laws for the whole or any part thereof,
whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the
State of Assam or otherwise;(b) define the matters with respect to which theexecutive power of the autonomous State shall
extend;(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of
Assam shall be assigned to the autonomous State in
so far as the proceeds thereof are attributable to the
autonomous State;(d) provide that any reference to a State in anyarticle of this Constitution shall be construed as
including a reference to the autonomous State; and(e) make such supplemental, incidental andconsequential provisions as may be deemed

necessary.
 (3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in
so far as such amendment relates to any of the matters
specified in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (
b) of clause (2)shall have no effect unless the amendment is passed in
each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of
the members present and voting. (4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall
not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part X.ŠThe Scheduled and Tribal Areas.
ŠArt. 244A.)151 


 PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND
THE STATES
CHAPTER I.ŠL
EGISLATIVE
 RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers245. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of
the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may
make laws for the whole or any part of the State.(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to beinvalid on the ground that it would have extra-territorial
operation.246. (1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and(3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the
Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
ﬁUnion Listﬂ).(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3),Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the Legislature of
any State 1*** also, have power to make laws with respectto any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
ﬁConcurrent Listﬂ). (3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of
any State 1***  has exclusive power to make laws for such
State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this
Constitution referred to as the ﬁState Listﬂ).(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respectto any matter for any part of the territory of India not
included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that such matter isa matter enumerated in the State List.1521The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by s. 29 and Sch.,
 ibid.
, for ﬁ in Part A or  Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ.
Extent of lawsmade by
Parliament and
by the

Legislatures of
States.Subject-matter oflaws made by
Parliament and by
the Legislatures of
States. 


 247. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of
any additional courts for the better administration of
laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with
respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List.248. (1) Parliament has exclusive power to make anylaw with respect to any matter not enumerated in the
Concurrent List or State List.(2) Such power shall include the power of makingany law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those
Lists.249. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has

declared by resolution supported by not less than two-
thirds of the members present and voting that it is
necessary or expedient in the national interest that
Parliament should make laws with respect to any matter
enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution,
it shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the
whole or any part of the territory of India with respect
to that matter while the resolution remains in force.(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remainin force for such period not exceeding one year as may
be specified therein:
Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approvingthe continuance in force of any such resolution
is passed in the manner provided in clause (1), such
resolution shall continue in force for a further period of
one year from the date on which under this clause it
would otherwise have ceased to be in force.(3) A law made by Parliament which Parliamentwould not but for the passing of a resolution under clause
(1) have been competent to make shall, to the extent of

the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration

of a period of six months after the resolution has ceased
to be in force, except as respects things done or omitted
to be done before the expiration of the said period.Power of
Parliament to
provide for the
establishment of
certain additional
courts.Residuary powersof legislation.Power ofParliament to
legislate with
respect to a

matter in the
State List in thenational interest.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 247Š249.)153 


 250. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in operation, have power to make laws for the whole or
any part of the territory of India with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in the State List.(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliamentwould not but for the issue of a Proclamation of
Emergency have been competent to make shall, to theextent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the
expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation
has ceased to operate, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before the expiration of the said
period.251. Nothing in articles 249 and 250 shall restrict thepower of the Legislature of a State to make any law
which under this Constitution it has power to make, but
if any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a
State is repugnant to any provision of a law made byParliament which Parliament has under either of the saidarticles power to make, the law made by Parliament,
whether passed before or after the law made by the
Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and the law made
by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the
repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by
Parliament continues to have effect, be inoperative.252. (1) If it appears to the Legislatures of two or moreStates to be desirable that any of the matters with respectto which Parliament has no power to make laws for theStates except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should
be regulated in such States by Parliament by law, and if

resolutions to that effect are passed by all the Houses of
the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for
Parliament to pass an Act for regulating that matteraccordingly, and any Act so passed shall apply to such
States and to any other State by which it is adopted

afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the
House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the

Houses of the Legislature of that State.Power ofParliament to
legislate with
respect to any
matter in the State
List if a
Proclamation of
Emergency is in

operation.Inconsistencybetween laws
made by
Parliament under
articles 249 and
250 and laws
made by the

Legislatures of
States.Power ofParliament to
legislate for two
or more States by
consent and
adoption of such
legislation by any
other State.154THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 250Š252.) 


 (2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amendedor repealed by an Act of Parliament passed or adopted inlike manner but shall not, as respects any State to whichit applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of theLegislature of that State.253. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make
any law for the whole or any part of the territory of Indiafor implementing any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country or countries or any decision madeat any international conference, association or other body.
254. (1) If any provision of a law made by theLegislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of alaw made by Parliament which Parliament is competentto enact, or to any provision of an existing law withrespect to one of the matters enumerated in the ConcurrentList, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law
made by Parliament, whether passed before or after thelaw made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case
may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of therepugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State1*** with respect to one of the matters enumerated in theConcurrent List contains any provision repugnant to theprovisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or anexisting law with respect to that matter, then, the law so
made by the Legislature of such State shall, if it has beenreserved for the consideration of the President and hasreceived his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall preventParliament from enacting at any time any law with respectto the same matter including a law adding to, amending,varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislatureof the State.Legislation forgiving effect to
international
agreements.Inconsistencybetween laws
made by
Parliament and
laws made by the
Legislatures of
States.1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 252Š254.)155 


 255.  No Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a
State 1***, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
invalid by reason only that some recommendation or
previous sanction required by this Constitution was not
given, if assent to that Act was givenŠ(a) where the recommendation required was thatof the Governor, either by the Governor or by the

President;(b) where the recommendation required was thatof the Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by
the President;(c) where the recommendation or previoussanction required was that of the President, by the
President.CHAPTER II.ŠA
DMINISTRATIVE
 RELATIONS
General256. The executive power of every State shall be so
exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that
State, and the executive power of the Union shall extend
to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear
to the Government of India to be necessary for that
purpose.257. (1) The executive power of every State shall be soexercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of
the executive power of the Union, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such
directions to a State as may appear to the Government of
India to be necessary for that purpose.(2) The executive power of the Union shall alsoextend to the giving of directions to a State as to the
construction and maintenance of means of communicationRequirements as to
recommendations
and previous
sanctions to be
regarded as matters
of procedure only.
1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.Obligation ofStates and the
Union.Control of theUnion over States
in certain cases.156THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 255Š257.) 


 declared in the direction to be of national or militaryimportance:Provided that nothing in this clause shall be takenas restricting the power of Parliament to declare
highways or waterways to be national highways or
national waterways or the power of the Union with
respect to the highways or waterways so declared or the
power of the Union to construct and maintain means of
communication as part of its functions with respect to
naval, military and air force works.(3) The executive power of the Union shall alsoextend to the giving of directions to a State as to the
measures to be taken for the protection of the railways
within the State.
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a
State under clause (2) as to the construction or
maintenance of any means of communication or under
clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection
of any railway, costs have been incurred in excess of

those which would have been incurred in the discharge
of the normal duties of the State if such direction had
not been given, there shall be paid by the Government
of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in

default of agreement, as may be determined by an
arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in

respect of the extra costs so incurred by the State.1257A. [Assistance to States by deployment of armed forcesor other forces of the Union.] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (
w.e.f.
 20-6-1979).
258. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, the President may, with the consent of the

Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers
functions in relation to any matter to which the executive
power of the Union extends.Power of the Union
to confer powers,
etc., on States in
certain cases.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 257Š258.)157 


 (2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any
State may, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with
respect to which the Legislature of the State has no power
to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or

authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of
duties, upon the State or officers and authorities thereof.(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and dutieshave been conferred or imposed upon a State or officers
or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by the
Government of India to the State such sum as may beagreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined
by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India,
in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred
by the State in connection with the exercise of those
powers and duties.1[258A. Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, the Governor of a State may, with the

consent of the Government of India, entrust either
conditionally or unconditionally to that Government orto its officers functions in relation to any matter to whichthe executive power of the State extends.]259. [Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First
Schedule.] Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, s. 29 
and Sch.260. The Government of India may by agreementwith the Government of any territory not being part ofthe territory of India undertake any executive, legislative
or judicial functions vested in the Government of such
territory, but every such agreement shall be subject to,

and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of

foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.261. (1) Full faith and credit shall be given throughoutthe territory of India to public acts, records and judicial
proceedings of the Union and of every State.Power of theStates to entrust
functions to the
Union.Jurisdiction of theUnion in relation
to territories
outside India.Public acts, recordsand judicial
proceedings.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 18.158THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 258Š261.) 


 (2) The manner in which and the conditions underwhich the acts, records and proceedings referred to inclause (1) shall be proved and the effect thereofdetermined shall be as provided by law made byParliament.(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed bycivil courts in any part of the territory of India shall becapable of execution anywhere within that territoryaccording to law.
Disputes relating to Waters262. (1) Parliament may by law provide for theadjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect tothe use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, anyinter-State river or river valley.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,Parliament may by law provide that neither the SupremeCourt nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction inrespect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred toin clause (1).Co-ordination between States263. If at any time it appears to the President that thepublic interests would be served by the establishment ofa Council charged with the duty ofŠ(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes
which may have arisen between States;(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which
some or all of the States, or the Union and one or
more of  the States, have a common interest; or
(c) making recommendations upon any such
subject and, in particular, recommendations for the
better co-ordination of policy and action with respectto that subject,it shall be lawful for the President by order to establishsuch a Council, and to define the nature of the duties to
be performed by it and its organisation and procedure.Adjudication ofdisputes relating
to waters of inter-
State rivers or
river valleys.Provisions withrespect to an
inter-State
Council.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XI.ŠRelations between the Union and the States.ŠArts. 261Š263.)159 


 PART XII
FINANCE,  PROPERTY,  CONTRACTS  AND  SUITS
CHAPTER I.ŠF
INANCEGeneral1[264. In this Part, ﬁFinance Commissionﬂ means aFinance Commission constituted under article 280.]265. No tax shall be levied or collected except byauthority of law.
266. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and tothe provisions of this Chapter with respect to theassignment of the whole or part of the net proceeds ofcertain taxes and duties to States, all revenues receivedby the Government of India, all loans raised by thatGovernment by the issue of treasury bills, loans or waysand means advances and all moneys received by thatGovernment in repayment of loans shall form one
consolidated fund to be entitled  ﬁthe Consolidated Fund
of Indiaﬂ, and all revenues received by the Governmentof a State, all loans raised by that Government by theissue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advancesand all moneys received by that Government in
repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund tobe entitled ﬁthe Consolidated Fund of the Stateﬂ.(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalfof the Government of India or the Government of a Stateshall be credited to the public account of India or thepublic account of the State, as the case may be.(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Indiaor the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriatedexcept in accordance with law and for the purposes andin the manner provided in this Constitution.
160Interpretation.Taxes not to be
imposed save by
authority of law.
ConsolidatedFunds and public
accounts of India
and of the States.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh  Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for art. 264.
 


 267. (1) Parliament may by law establish aContingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to beentitled ﬁthe Contingency Fund of Indiaﬂ into whichshall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be

placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances
to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisationof such expenditure by Parliament by law underarticle 115 or article 116.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establisha Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled ﬁthe Contingency Fund of the Stateﬂ into which
shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be

placed at the disposal of the Governor 1***of the Stateto enable advances to be made by him out of such Fundfor the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure
pending authorisation of such expenditure by the

Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or
article 206.Distribution of Revenues between theUnion and the States268. (1) Such stamp duties and such duties of exciseon medicinal and toilet preparations as are mentioned in
the Union List shall be levied by the Government of
India but shall be collectedŠ(a) in the case where such duties are leviablewithin any 2[Union territory], by the Government ofIndia, and(b) in other cases, by the States within which suchduties are respectively leviable.Contingency Fund.Duties levied bythe Union but
collected and
appropriated by
the States.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by  s. 29 and Sch., 
ibid., for ﬁState specified in Part C of the First Scheduleﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 267-268.)161 


 (2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such
duty leviable within any State shall not form part of theConsolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to thatState.*[268A. (1) Taxes on services shall be levied by the
Government of India and such tax shall be collected andappropriated by the Government of India and the Statesin the manner provided in clause (2).(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such taxlevied in accordance with the provisions of clause (1)shall beŠ(a) collected by the Government of India and theStates;(b) appropriated by the Government of India andthe States,in accordance with such principles of collection andappropriation as may be formulated by Parliament bylaw.]
269. 1[(1) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and
taxes on the consignment of goods shall be levied and
collected by the Government of India but shall be assignedand shall be deemed to have been assigned to the Stateson or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the manner
provided in clause (2).Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this clause,Š(a) the expression ﬁtaxes on the sale or purchaseof goodsﬂ shall mean taxes on sale or purchase of
goods other than newspapers, where such sale orpurchase takes place in the course of inter-State tradeor commerce;(b) the expression ﬁtaxes on the consignment ofgoodsﬂ shall mean taxes on the consignment of goods(whether the consignment is to the person making it
or to any other person), where such consignmenttakes place in the course of inter-State trade orcommerce.Service tax levied byUnion and collected
and appropriated by
the Union and the
States.Taxes levied and
collected by the
Union but assigned
to the States.*Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (which is yet not inforce, date to be notified later on).1Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 268-269.)162 


 (2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any suchtax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceedsattributable to Union territories, shall not form part of theConsolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to theStates within which that tax is leviable in that year, and
shall be distributed among those States in accordancewith such principles of distribution as may be formulatedby Parliament by law.]
1[(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles fordetermining when a 2[sale or purchase of, or consignmentof, goods] takes place in the course of inter-State trade orcommerce.]3[270. (1) All taxes and duties referred to in the UnionList, except the duties and taxes referred to in articles*[268 and 269], respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties
referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specificpurposes under any law made by Parliament shall belevied and collected by the Government of India andshall be distributed between the Union and the States inthe manner provided in clause (2).(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the netproceeds of any such tax or duty in any financial yearshall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India,but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax
or duty is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed
among those States in such manner and from such timeas may be prescribed in the manner provided inclause (3).(3) In this article, ﬁprescribedﬂ means,Š(i) until a Finance Commission has beenconstituted, prescribed by the President by order,
and(ii) after a Finance Commission has beenconstituted, prescribed by the President by orderafter considering the recommendations of theFinance Commission.]Taxes levied and
distributed between
the Union and the
States.1Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3.2Subs by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 2, for ﬁsale or purchaseof goodsﬂ.3Subs. by  the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 3, for art. 270 (w.e.f.
1-4-1996).*The words and figures in brackets shall stand substituted as ﬁarticles 268, 268A and269ﬂ by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (which is yet not in
force, date to be notified later on).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 269-270.)163 


 271. Notwithstanding anything in articles 269 and
270, Parliament may at any time increase any of the
duties or taxes referred to in those articles by a surchargefor purposes of the Union and the whole proceeds of anysuch surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund
of India.272. [Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union
and may be distributed between the Union and the States.]
Rep. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000,s. 4.
273. (1) There shall be charged on the ConsolidatedFund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenuesof the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal, in

lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds ineach year of export duty on jute and jute products tothose States, such sums as may be prescribed.(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to becharged on the Consolidated Fund of India so long asany export duty on jute or jute products continues to belevied by the Government of India or until the expirationof ten years from the commencement of this Constitution
whichever is earlier.
(3) In this article, the expression ﬁprescribedﬂ hasthe same meaning as in article 270.274. (1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or variesany tax or duty in which States are interested, or

which varies the meaning of the expression ﬁagriculturalincomeﬂ as defined for the purposes of the enactmentsrelating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the principles
on which under any of the foregoing provisions of thisChapter moneys are or may be distributable to States, orwhich imposes any such surcharge for the purposes of
the Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions ofthis Chapter, shall be introduced or moved in either
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of
the President.(2) In this article, the expression ﬁtax or duty in whichStates are interestedﬂ meansŠ(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the netproceeds whereof are assigned to any State; orSurcharge oncertain duties and
taxes for purposes
of the Union.Grants in lieu ofexport duty on jute
and jute products.Priorrecommendation of
President required
to Bills affecting
taxation in which
States are
interested.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 271Š274.)164 


 (b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds
whereof sums are for the time being payable out of
the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provideshall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India ineach year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such Statesas Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance,
and different sums may be fixed for different States:Provided that there shall be paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the
revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as
may be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of
such schemes of development as may be undertaken bythe State with the approval of the Government of Indiafor the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration

of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the

administration of the rest of the areas of that State:Provided further that there shall be paid out of theConsolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the
revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring,equivalent toŠ(a) the average excess of expenditure over therevenues during the two years immediately precedingthe commencement of this Constitution in respect of
the administration of the tribal areas specified in1[Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of theSixth Schedule; and(b) the costs of such schemes of development asmay be undertaken by that State with the approval
of the Government of India for the purpose of raisingGrants from theUnion to certain
States.1Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
ﬁPart Aﬂ (w
.e.f. 21-1-1972).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 274-275.)165 


 the level of administration of the said areas to that of
the administration of the rest of the areas of thatState.1[(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomousState under article 244A,Š(i) any sums payable under clause (
a) of thesecond proviso to clause (1) shall, if theautonomous State comprises all the tribal areasreferred to therein, be paid to the autonomous State,
and, if the autonomous State comprises only some
of those tribal areas, be apportioned between the
State of Assam and the autonomous State as the
President may, by order, specify;
(ii) there shall be paid out of the ConsolidatedFund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of
the autonomous State sums, capital and recurring,equivalent to the costs of such schemes ofdevelopment as may be undertaken by the
autonomous State with the approval of the

Government of India for the purpose of raising
the level of administration of that State to that
of the administration of the rest of the State ofAssam.](2) Until provision is made by Parliament underclause (1), the powers conferred on Parliament underthat clause shall be exercisable by the President by orderand any order made by the President under this clause
shall have effect subject to any provision so made by
Parliament:Provided that after a Finance Commission has beenconstituted no order shall be made under this clause
by the President except after considering the
recommendations of the Finance Commission.
1Ins. by  the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 3.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArt. 275.)166 


 276. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 246, no
law of the Legislature of a State relating to taxes for thebenefit of the State or of a municipality, district board,

local board or other local authority therein in respect of
professions, trades, callings or employments shall be

invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income.(2) The total amount payable in respect of any oneperson to the State or to any one municipality, district

board, local board or other local authority in the State by
way of taxes on professions, trades, callings andemployments shall not exceed 1[two thousand and fivehundred rupees] per annum.2*                   *                           *                               *
(3) The power of the Legislature of a State to makelaws as aforesaid with respect to taxes on professions,
trades, callings and employments shall not be construedas limiting in any way the power of Parliament to makelaws with respect to taxes on income accruing from or
arising out of professions, trades, callings and
employments. 277. Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which,
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution, were being lawfully levied by the
Government of any State or by any municipality or other
local authority or body for the purposes of the State,municipality, district or other local area may,
notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees
are mentioned in the Union List, continue to be levied
and to be applied to the same purposes until provision
to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.
278. [Agreement with States in Part B of the FirstSchedule with regard to certain financial matters.] Rep. by theConstitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch.Taxes on
professions, trades,
callings and
employments.Savings.1Subs. by the Constitution (Sixtieth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for ﬁtwo hundred andfifty rupeesﬂ.2Proviso omitted by s. 2, ibid.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 276Š278.)167 


 279. (1) In the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
ﬁnet proceedsﬂ means in relation to any tax or duty theproceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for
the purposes of those provisions the net proceeds of any
tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or

attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, whosecertificate shall be final.(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other expressprovision of this Chapter, a law made by Parliament or
an order of the President may, in any case where under
this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may be,
assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which
the proceeds are to be calculated, for the time from or at
which and the manner in which any payments are to be
made, for the making of adjustments between one
financial year and another, and for any other incidental
or ancillary matters. 280. 
(1) The President shall, within two years fromthe commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at
the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time
as the President considers necessary, by order constitute

a Finance Commission which shall consist of a

Chairman and four other members to be appointed bythe President. (2) Parliament may by law determine the
qualifications which shall be requisite for appointmentas members of the Commission and the manner in which
they shall be selected. (3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make
recommendations to the President as toŠ(a) the distribution between the Union and theStates of the net proceeds of taxes which are to be, or
may be, divided between them under this Chapter
and the allocation between the States of the respective
shares of such proceeds;(b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States out of theConsolidated Fund of India;Calculation of ﬁnet
proceedsﬂ, etc.FinanceCommission.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 279-280.)168 


 1[(bb) the measures needed to augment theConsolidated Fund of a State to supplement the
resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis
of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State;]2[(c) the measures needed to augment theConsolidated Fund of a State to supplement the
resources of the Municipalities in the State on the
basis of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State;]3[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commissionby the President in the interests of sound finance. (4) The Commission shall determine their procedure
and shall have such powers in the performance of their
functions as Parliament may by law confer on them. 281. The President shall cause every recommendationmade by the Finance Commission under the provisions of
this Constitution together with an explanatory
memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid
before each House of Parliament.Miscellaneous Financial Provisions 282. The Union or a State may make any grants forany public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is
not one with respect to which Parliament or the
Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make
laws. 283. (1) The custody of the Consolidated Fund ofIndia and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment
of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys
therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those
credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the
Government of India, their payment into the public
account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from
such account and all other matters connected with orRecommendations
of the Finance
Commission.Expendituredefrayable by the
Union or a State
out of its revenues.Custody, etc., of
Consolidated
Funds, Contingency
Funds and moneys
credited to the
public accounts.
1Ins. by  the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
2Ins. by  the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
3Sub-clause (c) re-lettered as sub-clause (
d) by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 280Š283.)169 


 ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law
made by Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf
is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by thePresident. (2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State
and the Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of
moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys
therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those
credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of theGovernment of the State, their payment into the publicaccount of the State and the withdrawal of moneys from
such account and all other matters connected with or
ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law
made by the Legislature of the State, and, until provision
in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rulesmade by the Governor 
1*** of the State.284. All moneys received by or deposited withŠ(a) any officer employed in connection with theaffairs of the Union or of a State in his capacity as
such, other than revenues or public moneys raised
or received by the Government of India or theGovernment of the State, as the case may be, or(b) any court within the territory of India to thecredit of any cause, matter, account or persons,
shall be paid into the public account of India or thepublic account of State, as the case may be.285. (1) The property of the Union shall, save in so
far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt
from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authoritywithin a State.  (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by
law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within a

State from levying any tax on any property of the Union
to which such property was immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution liable or treated asliable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in thatState.Custody ofsuitors™ deposits
and other moneys
received by public
servants and
courts.Exemption ofproperty of the
Union from State
taxation.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬁ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 283Š285.)170 


  286. 
(1)  No law of a State shall impose, or authorise
the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goodswhere such sale or purchase takes placeŠ(a) outside the State; or(b) in the course of the import of the goods into,or export of the goods out of, the territory of India.1*                       *                               *                                   *
2[(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles fordetermining when a sale or purchase of goods takes placein any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).3[(3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes,or authorises the imposition of,Š(a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declaredby Parliament by law to be of special importance in
inter-State trade or commerce; or(b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, beinga tax of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (29A) ofarticle 366,be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard tothe system of levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as

Parliament may by law specify.]]
 287. 
Save in so far as Parliament may by law
otherwise provide, no law of a State shall impose, orauthorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or
sale of electricity (whether produced by a Government or
other persons) which isŠ(a) consumed by the Government of India, or soldto the Government of India for consumption by that
Government; or(b) consumed in the construction, maintenanceor operation of any railway by the Government of
India or a railway company operating that railway,
or sold to that Government or any such railwayRestrictions as toimposition of tax
on the sale or
purchase of goods.Exemption fromtaxes on electricity.
1Explanation to cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4.
2Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for cls. (2) and (3).
3Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 3,  for cl. (3).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 286-287.)171 


 company for consumption in the construction,
maintenance or operation of any railway,
and any such law imposing, or authorising theimposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall securethat the price of electricity sold to the Government ofIndia for consumption by that Government, or to anysuch railway company as aforesaid for consumption inthe construction, maintenance or operation of any railway,
shall be less by the amount of the tax than the pricecharged to other consumers of a substantial quantity ofelectricity.
288. (1) Save in so far as the President may by order
otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediatelybefore the commencement of this Constitution shallimpose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of
any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed,distributed or sold by any authority established by anyexisting law or any law made by Parliament for regulatingor developing any inter-State river or river-valley.
 Explanation.ŠThe expression ﬁlaw of a State in forceﬂin this clause shall include a law of a State passed ormade before the commencement of this Constitution andnot previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or partsof it may not be then in operation either at all or inparticular areas.(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, orauthorise the imposition of, any such tax as is mentionedin clause (1), but no such law shall have any effect unlessit has, after having been reserved for the consideration ofthe President, received his assent; and if any such lawprovides for the fixation of the rates and other incidentsof such tax by means of rules or orders to be made underthe law by any authority, the law shall provide for the
previous consent of the President being obtained to themaking of any such rule or order.
289.  (1)  The property and income of a State shall be
exempt from Union taxation.(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Unionfrom imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any taxto such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide
Exemption from
taxation by States
in respect of water
or electricity in
certain cases.Exemption ofproperty and
income of a State
from Union
taxation.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 287Š289.)172 


 in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on
by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any

operations connected therewith, or any property used oroccupied for the purposes of such trade or business, orany income accruing or arising in connection therewith.(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade orbusiness, or to any class of trade or business, whichParliament may by law declare to be incidental to theordinary functions of Government.290. Where under the provisions of this Constitutionthe expenses of any court or Commission, or the pensionpayable to or in respect of a person who has servedbefore the commencement of this Constitution under theCrown in India or after such commencement in connectionwith the affairs of the Union or of a State, are charged onthe Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fundof a State, then, ifŠ
(a) in the case of a charge on the ConsolidatedFund of India, the court or Commission serves any
of the separate needs of a State, or the person hasserved wholly or in part in connection with the affairsof a State; or(b) in the case of a charge on the ConsolidatedFund of a State, the court or  Commission serves any
of the separate needs of the Union or another State,or the person has served wholly or in part inconnection with the affairs of the Union or anotherState,there shall be charged on and paid  out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State or, as the case may be, the
Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund ofthe other State, such contribution in respect of theexpenses or pension as may be agreed, or as may in
default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to beappointed by the Chief Justice of India.1[290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousandrupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, theConsolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to
Adjustment in
respect of certain
expenses and
pensions.Annual payment tocertain Devaswom
Funds.1Ins. by  the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 19.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 289Š290A.)173 


 the Travancore Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen
lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, andpaid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of 1[Tamil
Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund established in
that State for the maintenance of Hindu temples andshrines in the territories transferred to that State on the1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-

Cochin.]291. [Privy purse sums of Rulers.] Rep. by the Constitution(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act,
 197l, 
s. 2.CHAPTER II.ŠBORROWING292. The executive power of the Union extends to
borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund ofIndia within such limits, if any, as may from time to time

be fixed by Parliament by law and to the giving of
guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.
293. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, theexecutive power of a State extends to borrowing withinthe territory of India upon the security of the ConsolidatedFund of the State within such limits, if any, as may from

time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by
law and to  the giving of guarantees within such limits,

if any, as may be so fixed.
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such
conditions as may be laid down by or under any lawmade by Parliament, make loans to any State or, so long
as any limits fixed under article 292 are not exceeded,

give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any State,
and any sums required for the purpose of making such
loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.(3) A State may not without the consent of theGovernment of India raise any loan if there is stilloutstanding any part of a loan which has been made to
the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor
Government, or in respect of which a guarantee  has been
given by the Government of India or by its predecessorGovernment.Borrowing by theGovernment of
India.1Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, forﬁMadrasﬂ (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
Borrowing byStates.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 290AŠ293.)174 


 (4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subjectto such conditions, if any, as the Government of India

may think fit to impose.CHAPTER III.ŠPROPERTY
, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS,LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS
 AND SUITS294. As from the commencement of thisConstitutionŠ(a) all property and assets which immediatelybefore such commencement were vested in HisMajesty for the purposes of the Government of theDominion of India and all property and assets whichimmediately before such commencement were vestedin His Majesty for the purposes of the Governmentof each Governor™s Province shall vest respectively
in the Union and the corresponding State, and(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of theGovernment of the Dominion of India and of theGovernment of each Governor™s Province, whether
arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be therights, liabilities and obligations respectively of theGovernment of India and the Government of eachcorresponding State,subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reasonof the creation before the commencement of thisConstitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of theProvinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and
East Punjab.295. (1) As from the commencement of thisConstitutionŠ(a) all property and assets which immediatelybefore such commencement were vested in anyIndian State corresponding to a State specified inPart B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union,
if the purposes for which such property and assetswere held immediately before such commencementwill thereafter be purposes of the Union relating toany of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
andSuccession toproperty, assets,

rights, liabilities
and obligations in
certain cases.Succession toproperty, assets,

rights, liabilities
and obligations in
other cases.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 293Š295.)175 


 (b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the
Government of any Indian State corresponding to a
State specified in Part B of the First Schedule, whether
arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be therights, liabilities and obligations of the Government
of India, if the purposes for which such rights were
acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurredbefore such commencement will thereafter bepurposes of the Government of India relating to any
of the matters enumerated in the Union List,subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by theGovernment of India with the Government of that
State.(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each Statespecified in Part B of the First Schedule shall, as from thecommencement of this Constitution, be the successor ofthe Government of the corresponding Indian State asregards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities
and obligations, whether arising out of any contract orotherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1).296. Subject as hereinafter provided, any property inthe territory of India which, if this Constitution had notcome into operation, would have accrued to His Majesty
or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by
escheat or lapse, or as 
bona vacantia for want of a rightfulowner, shall, if it is property situate in a State, vest in

such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union:Provided that any property which at the date whenit would have so accrued to His Majesty or to the Rulerof an Indian State was in the possession or under thecontrol of the Government of India or the Government
of a State shall, according as the purposes for which itwas then used or held were purposes of the Union or ofa State, vest in the Union or in that State.Explanation.ŠIn this article, the expressions ﬁRulerﬂand ﬁIndian Stateﬂ have the same meanings as in
article 363.Property accruingby escheat or lapse
or as bona vacantia.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 295-296.)176 


 1[297. (1) All lands, minerals and other things of value
underlying the ocean within the territorial waters, or thecontinental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of Indiashall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of
the Union.(2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zoneof India shall also vest in the Union and be held for thepurposes of the Union.(3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continentalshelf, the exclusive economic zone, and other maritime

zones, of India shall be such as may be specified, from

time to time, by or under any law made by Parliament.]
2[298. The executive power of the Union and of eachState shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or
business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of
property and the making of contracts for any purpose:
Provided thatŠ(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, inso far as such trade or business or such purpose is
not one with respect to which Parliament may make
laws, be subject in each State to legislation by theState; and(b) the said executive power of each State shall,in so far as such trade or business or such purpose
is not one with respect to which the State Legislature
may make laws, be subject to legislation byParliament.]299. (1) All contracts made in the exercise of theexecutive power of the Union or of a State shall be
expressed to be made by the President, or by the
Governor 3*** of the State, as the case may be, and allsuch contracts and all assurances of property made inthe exercise of that power shall be executed on behalf of
Things of valuewithin territorial
waters or
continental shelf
and resources of
the exclusive
economic zone to
vest in the Union.Contracts.1Subs. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for art. 297 (w.e.f.
27-5-1976).2Subs. by  the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 20, for art. 298.
3The words ﬁor the Rajpramukhﬁ omitted by  s. 29 and  Sch., 
ibid.Power to carry on
trade, etc.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 297Š299.)177 


 the President or the Governor 1*** by such persons and insuch manner as he may direct or authorise.(2) Neither the President nor the Governor 2*** shallbe personally liable in respect of any contract or assurancemade or executed for the purposes of this Constitution,
or for the purposes of any enactment relating to theGovernment of India heretofore in force, nor shall anyperson making or executing any such contract or
assurance on behalf of any of them be personally liablein respect thereof.300. (1) The Government of India may sue or be suedby the name of the Union of India and the Governmentof a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State andmay, subject to any provisions which may be made by

Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such Stateenacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution,sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the

like cases as the Dominion of India and the correspondingProvinces or the corresponding Indian States might havesued or been sued if this Constitution had not been
enacted.(2) If at the commencement of this ConstitutionŠ(a) any legal proceedings are pending to whichthe Dominion of India is a party, the Union of India

shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominionin those proceedings; and
(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which aProvince or an Indian State is a party, the
corresponding State shall be deemed to be substitutedfor the Province or the Indian State in those
proceedings.3[CHAPTER IV.ŠR
IGHT TO PROPERTY
300A.  No person shall be deprived of his propertysave by authority of law.]
Suits andproceedings.Persons not to bedeprived of
property save by
authority of law.
1The words ﬁor the Rajpramukhﬁ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2The words ﬁnor the Rajpramukhﬁ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 34 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XII.ŠFinance, Property, Contracts and Suits.ŠArts. 299Š300A.)178 


 PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE
WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
301. Subject to the other provisions of this Part,   trade,commerce  and intercourse throughout  the territory of

India shall be free.302. Parliament may  by law impose such restrictionson the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse
between one State and another or within any part of the
territory of India as may be required in the public interest.303. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 302,
neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall
have power to make any law giving, or authorising the
giving of, any preference to one State over another, or

making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination
between one State and another, by virtue of any entry

relating to trade  and commerce in any of the Lists in the

Seventh Schedule.(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament
from making any law giving, or authorising  the giving

of, any preference or making, or authorising the making

of, any discrimination if it is declared by such law that
it is necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with
a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part of
the territory of India.304. Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article303, the Legislature of a State  may by lawŠ
(a) impose on goods imported from other States1[or the Union territories] any tax to which similargoods manufactured or produced in that State are
subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between

goods so imported and goods so manufactured or
produced; and179Freedom of trade,commerce and
intercourse.Power ofParliament to
impose restrictions
on trade, commerce
and intercourse.Restrictions on the
legislative powers
of the Union and

of the States with
regard to trade
and commerce.Restrictions ontrade, commerce

and intercourse
among States.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
 


 (b) impose such reasonable restrictions on thefreedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or
within that State as may be required in the public
interest:Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposesof clause (b) shall be introduced or moved in theLegislature of a State without the previous sanction of
the President.1[305. Nothing in articles 301 and 303  shall affect
the provisions of any existing law except in so far  as the

President may by order otherwise direct; and nothing in
article 301 shall affect the operation  of any law made

before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1955, in so far as it  relates to, or prevent
Parliament or the Legislature of a State from making any
law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in sub-

clause (ii) of clause (6) of article 19.]306. [Power of certain States in Part B of the First Scheduleto impose restrictions on trade and commerce.] Rep. by theConstitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.307. Parliament may by law appoint such  authority
as it considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes
of articles 301, 302, 303 and 304, and confer on the

authority so appointed such powers and such duties as
it thinks necessary.
Saving of existing
laws and laws
providing for State
monopolies.Appointment ofauthority for
carrying out the
purposes of articles
301 to 304.
1Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955,  s. 4, for art. 305.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIII.ŠTrade, Commerce and Intercourse within the
Territory of India.ŠArts. 304
Š307.)180 


 PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.ŠSERVICES308. In this Part, unless the context otherwiserequires, the expression ﬁStateﬂ 1[does not include theState of Jammu and  Kashmir].
309. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the
recruitment, and conditions of service of persons
appointed, to public services and posts in connectionwith the affairs  of the Union or of any State:
Provided that it shall be competent for the Presidentor such person as he may direct in the case of services
and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union,
and for the Governor 2*** of a State or such person as hemay direct in the case of services and posts in connectionwith the affairs of the  State, to make  rules regulating therecruitment, and the conditions of service of persons

appointed, to such services and posts until provision in
that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate
Legislature under this article, and any rules so made
shall have effect subject to the provisions of any suchAct.310. (1) Except as expressly provided by thisConstitution,  every person who is a member of a  defence
service or of  a civil service of the Union or of an

all-India service or holds any post connected with defence
or any civil post under the Union holds office during the
pleasure of the President, and every person who is amember of a civil service of a State or holds any civil
post under a State holds office during the pleasure of
the Governor 3*** of the State.(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civilpost under the Union or a State holds office during the181Interpretation.Recruitment andconditions of
service of persons

serving the Union
or a State.
Tenure of office of
persons serving the
Union or a State.1 Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ﬁmeans
a State  specified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ.
2The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.3The words ﬁor, as the case may be, the Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by  s. 29 and Sch., 
ibid. 


 pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, of the
Governor 1*** of the State, any contract under which aperson, not being a member of a defence service or of an
all-India service or of a civil service of the Union or a
State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such
a post may, if the President or the Governor 
2***, as thecase may be, deems it necessary in order to secure theservices  of a person having special qualifications, providefor the payment to him of  compensation, if before the

expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or
he is, for reasons not connected with any misconduct on

his part, required to vacate that post.311. (1) No person who is a member of a civil serviceof the Union or an all-India service or a civil service
of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a

State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority
subordinate to that by which he was appointed.3[(2) No such person  as aforesaid shall be dismissed
or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in
which he has been informed of the charges against him
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges 4***:5[Provided that where it is proposed after suchinquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such

penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence
adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary
to give such person any opportunity of making  represen-
tation on the penalty proposed:Provided further that this clause shall not applyŠ](a) where a person is dismissed or removed orreduced in rank on the ground of conduct which hasled to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
Dismissal, removalor reduction in rank
of persons
employed in civil
capacities under the
Union or a State.1The words ﬁor the Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2The words ﬁor the Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.3Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 10, for cls. (2) and (3).4Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 44(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 310Š311.)
182 


 (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or
remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied
that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority
in writing, it is not  reasonably practicable to hold

such inquiry; or(c) where the President or the Governor, as the
case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of thesecurity of the State it is not expedient to hold such
inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, aquestion arises whether it is reasonably practicable to holdsuch inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decisionthereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove
such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.]312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in 1[Chapter VI ofPart VI or Part XI], if the Council of States has declared
by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of themembers present and voting that it is necessary or
expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament
may by law provide for the creation of one  or more all

India services 2[(including  an all-India judicial service)]
common to the Union and the States, and, subject to theother provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment,
and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to

any such service.(2) The services known  at the commencement of this
Constitution as the Indian Administrative Service andthe Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be servicescreated by Parliament under this article.2[(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause(1) shall not include any post inferior to that of a district

judge as defined in article 236.(4) The law providing for the creation of theall-India judicial service aforesaid may contain suchprovisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VIAll-India services.1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45, for ﬁPart XIﬂ(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Ins. by s. 45, ibid.  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 311Š312.)
183 


 as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions ofthat law and no such law shall be deemed to be anamendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.]1[312A. (1) Parliament may by lawŠ(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively orretrospectively, the conditions of services as respects

remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as
respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having
been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary
of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown inIndia before the commencement  of this Constitution,continue on and after the commencement of the
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972,

to serve under the Government of India or of  a State

in any service or post;(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively orretrospectively, the conditions of service as respects
pension of  persons who, having been appointed by

the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council
to a civil service of the Crown in India before the
commencement of this Constitution, retired or
otherwise ceased to be in service at any time beforethe commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-
eighth Amendment) Act, 1972:Provided that in the case of  any such person who is
holding or has held the office of the Chief Justice or  other
Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairmanor other member of the Union or a State Public ServiceCommission or the Chief Election Commissioner, nothing

in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed asempowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his
appointment to such post, the conditions of his service to
his disadvantage except in so far as such conditions ofservice are applicable to him by reason of his beinga person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary
of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown inIndia.Power ofParliament to vary
or revoke
conditions of
service of officers

of certain services.1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2  (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 312Š312A.)184 


 (2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament
by law under this article, nothing in this article shallaffect the power of any Legislature or other authority
under any other provision of this Constitution to regulatethe conditions of service of persons referred to inclause (1).(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other courtshall have jurisdiction inŠ(a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, orany endorsement on, any covenant, agreement orother similar instrument which was entered  into or

executed by any person referred to in clause (1), or
arising out of any letter issued to such person, in
relation to his appointment to any civil service of
the Crown in India or his continuance  in service
under the Government of the Dominion  of India or
a Province thereof;(b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability orobligation under article 314 as originally enacted.(4) The provisions of this article shall have effectnotwithstanding anything in article 314 as originally
enacted or in any other provision  of this Constitution.]
313. Until other provision is made in this behalf underthis Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution and applicable to
any public service or any post which continues to exist
after the commencement of this Constitution, as an all-
India service or as service or post under the Union or aState shall continue in force so far as consistent with theprovisions of this Constitution.314. [Provision for protection of existing officers of certainservices.] Rep. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment)
Act, 1972, s. 3  
(w.e.f. 
29-8-1972).CHAPTER II.Š PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS315. (1) Subject to the provisions  of this article, there
shall  be a Public Service  Commission for the Union and
a Public Service  Commission  for each State.
Transitional
provisions.Public ServiceCommissions for
the Union and for
the States.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 312AŠ315.)185 


 (2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be
one Public Service Commission for that group of States,and if a resolution to that effect is passed by the House
or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the
Legislature of each of those States, Parliament may bylaw provide for the appointment of a Joint State Public
Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint
Commission) to  serve the needs of those States.
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain suchincidental and consequential provisions as may be
necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes ofthe law.
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, ifrequested so to do by the Governor 
1*** of a State, may,
with the approval of the President, agree to serve all or
any of the needs  of the State.
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union PublicService Commission or a State Public Service Commissionshall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construedas references to the Commission  serving the needs of the
Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the

particular matter  in question.
316. (1) The Chairman and other members of  a PublicService Commission shall be appointed, in the case of the
Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by thePresident, and in the case of a State  Commission, by the
Governor 1*** of the State:Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of themembers of every Public Service Commission shall be
persons who at the dates of their respective appointments
have held office for at least ten years either under  the

Government of India or under the Government of a State,and in computing the said period of ten years any periodbefore the commencement of this Constitution during
which a person has held office  under the Crown in India

or under the Government of an Indian State shall beincluded.Appointment andterm of office of
members.1The words  ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 315Š316.)186 


 1[(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission
becomes vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of
absence or for any other reason unable to perform the
duties of his office, those  duties shall, until some person
appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office hasentered on the duties thereof or, as the case may be,

until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed
by such one  of the other members of the Commission  as

the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a

Joint Commission,  and the Governor of the State in the
case of a State Commission, may appoint for thepurpose.(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shallhold office for a term of six years from the date on which

he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case
of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years,and in the case of a State Commission or a JointCommission, the age of 2[sixty-two years], whichever isearlier:Provided thatŠ(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may,
by writing under his hand addressed, in the case
of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, tothe President, and in the case of a State Commission,to the Governor 3*** of the State, resign his office;(b) a member of a Public Service Commission maybe removed from his office in the manner provided
in clause (1) or clause (3) of article  317.
(3) A person who holds office as a member of aPublic Service Commission shall, on the expiration of histerm of office, be ineligible for re-appointment to thatoffice.317. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), theChairman or any other member of a Public ServiceCommission shall only be removed from his office byRemoval andsuspension of a
member of a Public
Service Commission.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 11.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for ﬁsixty yearsﬂ.3The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 316Š317.)187 


 order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour
after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it bythe President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with
the procedure prescribed in that behalf under article 145,
reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the

case may  be, ought  on any such ground to be removed.
(2) The President, in the case of the Union Commissionor a Joint Commission, and the Governor 1*** in the caseof a State Commission, may suspend from office the
Chairman or any other member of the Commission in
respect of whom a reference  has been made to the Supreme
Court under clause (1) until the President has passedorders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court onsuch reference.(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), thePresident may by order remove from office the Chairman
or any other member of a Public Service Commission ifthe Chairman or  such other member, as the case may
be,Š(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or(b) engages during his term of office in any paidemployment outside the duties of his office; or(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit tocontinue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or
body.
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of a PublicService Commission is or becomes in any way concerned
or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on
behalf of the Government of India or the  Government of

a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or
in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwisethan as a member and in common with the othermembers of an incorporated company, he shall, for the

purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty ofmisbehaviour.
1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArt. 317.)188 


 318. In the case of the Union Commission or a JointCommission, the President and, in the case of a StateCommission, the Governor 1*** of the State may byregulationsŠ(a) determine the number of members of theCommission and their conditions of service; and(b) make provision with respect to the number ofmembers of the staff of the Commission and their
conditions of service:Provided that the conditions of service of a memberof a Public Service Commission shall not be varied to hisdisadvantage after his appointment.319. On ceasing to hold officeŠ(a) the Chairman of the Union Public ServiceCommission shall be ineligible for furtheremployment either under the Government of India

or under the Government of a State;(b) the Chairman of a State Public ServiceCommission shall be eligible for appointment as theChairman or any other member of the Union PublicService Commission or as the Chairman of any other
State Public Service Commission, but not for any
other employment either under the Government of
India or under the Government of a State;
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the
Union Public Service Commission shall be eligible
for appointment as the Chairman of the Union Public
Service Commission, or as the Chairman of a State
Public Service Commission, but not for any other
employment either under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State;(d) a member other than the Chairman of a StatePublic Service Commission shall be eligible forappointment as the Chairman or any other member
Power to makeregulations as to
conditions of
service of members
and staff of the
Commission.Prohibition as tothe holding of
offices by members
of Commission on
ceasing to be such
members.1The words  ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA((Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.Š
Arts. 318Š319.)189 


 of the Union Public Service Commission or as theChairman of that or any other State Public Service
Commission, but not for any other employment either
under the Government of India or under theGovernment of a State.320. (1) It shall be the duty of the Union and the StatePublic Service Commissions to conduct examinations for

appointments to the services of the Union and the servicesof the State respectively.
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Union Public ServiceCommission, if requested by any two or more States so todo, to assist those States in framing and operating schemesof joint recruitment for any services for which candidates
possessing special qualifications are required.(3) The Union Public Service Commission or the StatePublic Service Commission, as the case may be, shall beconsultedŠ(a) on all matters relating to methods ofrecruitment to civil services and for civil posts;(b) on the principles to be followed in makingappointments to civil services and posts and in
making promotions and transfers from one service
to another and on the suitability of candidates forsuch appointments, promotions or transfers;(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a personserving under the Government of India or theGovernment of a State in a civil capacity, including

memorials or petitions relating to such matters;(d) on any claim by or in respect of a person whois serving or has served under the Government ofIndia or the Government of a State or under the
Crown in India or under the Government of an IndianState, in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by
him in defending legal proceedings instituted against
him in respect of acts done or purporting to be donein the execution of his duty should be paid out of the
Functions ofPublic Service
Commissions.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 319Š320.)190 


 Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be,
out of the Consolidated Fund of the State;(e) on any claim for the award of a pension inrespect of injuries sustained by a person while
serving under the Government of India or the
Government of a State or under the Crown in India
or under the Government of an Indian State, in acivil capacity, and any question as to the amount of
any such award,and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commissionto advise on any matter so referred to them and on any
other matter which the President, or, as the case may be,
the Governor 1*** of the State, may refer to them: Provided that the President as respects the all-India
services and also as respects other services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union, and the
Governor 2***, as respects other services and posts inconnection with the affairs of a State, may makeregulations specifying the matters in which either
generally, or in any particular class of case or in any

particular circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a
Public Service Commission to be consulted.(4) Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public ServiceCommission to be consulted as respects the manner in
which any provision referred to in clause (4) of article 16
may be made or as respects the manner in which effect
may be given to the provisions of article 335.(5) All regulations made under the proviso toclause (3) by the President or the Governor 1*** of a Stateshall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each
House of Parliament or the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State, as the case may be, as soon as
possible after they are made, and shall be subject to suchmodifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment,as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses
1The words  ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
2The words  ﬁor Rajpramukh, as the case may beﬂ omitted by  s. 29 and Sch., 
ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArt. 320.)191 


 of the Legislature of the State may make during thesession in which they are so laid.321. An Act made by Parliament or, as the case may
be, the Legislature of a State may provide for the exercise
of additional functions by the Union Public Service
Commission or the State Public Service Commission as
respects the services of the Union or the State and also asrespects the services of any local authority or other bodycorporate constituted by law or of any public institution.322. The expenses of the Union or a State PublicService Commission, including any salaries, allowances
and pensions payable to or in respect of the members orstaff of the Commission, shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case may be, the

Consolidated Fund of the State.323. (1) It shall be the duty of the Union Commissionto present annually to the President a report as to thework done by the Commission and on receipt of suchreport the President shall cause a copy thereof together
with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if
any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted,

the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before
each House of Parliament. (2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to
present annually to the Governor 1*** of the State a reportas to the work done by the Commission, and it shall be
the duty of a Joint Commission to present annually to the
Governor 1*** of each of the States the needs of which areserved by the Joint Commission a report as to the workdone by the Commission in relation to that State, and in
either case the Governor 2***, shall, on receipt of suchreport, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum
explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice

of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons forsuch non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature ofthe State.Power to extendfunctions of
Public Service
Commissions.Expenses ofPublic Service
Commissions.Reports of PublicService
Commissions.1The words  ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
2The words  ﬁor Rajpramukh, as the case may beﬂ omitted by  s. 29 and Sch., 
ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIV.
ŠServices under the Union and the States.ŠArts. 320Š323.)192 


 1[PART XIVA
TRIBUNALS323A. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the
adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals ofdisputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and
conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the control of theGovernment of India or of any corporation owned orcontrolled by the Government.(2) A law made under clause (1) mayŠ(a) provide for the establishment of anadministrative tribunal for the Union and a separate
administrative tribunal for each State or for two or
more States;(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including thepower to punish for contempt) and authority which
may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;(c) provide for the procedure (including provisionsas to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed
by the said tribunals;(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, exceptthe jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article136, with respect to the disputes or complaints
referred to in clause (1);(e) provide for the transfer to each suchadministrative tribunal of any cases pending before
any court or other authority immediately before theestablishment of such tribunal as would have beenwithin the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes
of action on which such suits or proceedings are
based had arisen after such establishment;(f) repeal or amend any order made by thePresident under clause (3) of article 371D;1931Ins. by  the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 46  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
Administrativetribunals. 


 (g) contain such supplemental, incidental andconsequential provisions (including provisions as to

fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the
effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal
of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of,

such tribunals.(3) The provisions of this article shall have effectnotwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in
force.323B. (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law,
provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any
disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or
any of the matters specified in clause (2) with respect to
which such Legislature has power to make laws.(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are thefollowing, namely:Š(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement
of any tax;(b) foreign exchange, import and export acrosscustoms frontiers;(c) industrial and labour disputes;(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the Stateof any estate as defined in article 31A or of any rights
therein or the extinguishment or modification of any
such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural land
or in any other way;(e) ceiling on urban property;(f) elections to either House of Parliament or theHouse or either House of the Legislature of a State,
but excluding the matters referred to in article 329
and article 329A;(g) production, procurement, supply anddistribution of food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds
and oils) and such other goods as the President may,

by public notification, declare to be essential goodsTribunals for

other matters.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIVA.
ŠTribunals.ŠArts. 
323AŠ323B.)194 


 for the purpose of this article and control of prices ofsuch goods;1[(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issuesincluding the right, title and interest of landlords and
tenants;]2[(i)] offences against laws with respect to any of thematters specified in sub-clauses (a) to 3[(h)] and fees inrespect of any of those matters;2[(j)] any matter incidental to any of the mattersspecified in sub-clauses (a) to 4[(i)].(3) A law made under clause (1) mayŠ(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy oftribunals;(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including thepower to punish for contempt) and authority which
may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;(c) provide for the procedure (including provisionsas to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed
by the said tribunals;(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except thejurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136,
with respect to all or any of the matters falling within
the jurisdiction of the said tribunals;(e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal ofany cases pending before any court or any other
authority immediately before the establishment of

such tribunal as would have been within the
jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on
which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen
after such establishment;1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2Sub-clauses (h) and (i) re-lettered as sub-clauses (
i) and (j) by s. 2, 
ibid. (w.e.f.
15-5-1994).3Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ﬁ(
g)ﬂ (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
4Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for ﬁ(
h)ﬂ (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIVA.
ŠTribunals.ŠArt. 
323B.)195 


 (f) contain such supplemental, incidental andconsequential provisions (including provisions as to

fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem
necessary for the effective functioning of, and for  the
speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of

the orders of, such tribunals.(4) The provisions of this article shall have effectnotwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in
force.Explanation.ŠIn this article, ﬁappropriateLegislatureﬂ, in relation to any matter, means Parliament

or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to

make laws with respect to such matter in accordance
with the provisions of Part XI.]THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIVA.
ŠTribunals.ŠArt. 
323B.)196 


 PART XV
ELECTIONS324. (1) The superintendence, direction and controlof the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the

conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the
Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices
of President and Vice-President held under this

Constitution 1*** shall be vested in a Commission(referred to in this Constitution as the Election
Commission).(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the ChiefElection Commissioner and such number of other
Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may

from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners
shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that
behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.(3) When any other Election Commissioner is soappointed the Chief Election Commissioner shall act as
the Chairman of the Election Commission.(4) Before each general election to the House of thePeople and to the Legislative Assembly of each State,
and before the first general election and thereafter before
each biennial election to the Legislative Council of each
State having such Council, the President may also appoint
after consultation with the Election Commission such
Regional Commissioners as he may consider necessary
to assist the Election Commission in the performance
of the functions conferred on the Commission by
clause (1).(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made byParliament, the conditions of service and tenure of
office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional
Commissioners shall be such as the President may by
rule determine:197Superintendence,direction and

control of elections
to be vested in an
Election
Commission.1The words ﬁincluding the appointment of election tribunals for the decision of  doubts
and disputes arising out of or in connection with elections to Parliament and to the Legislaturesof Statesﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2. 


 Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shallnot be removed from his office except in like manner and
on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and
the conditions of service of the Chief Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment:Provided further that any other Election Commissioneror a Regional Commissioner shall not be removed from
office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election
Commissioner.
(6) The President, or the Governor 1*** of a State,shall, when so requested by the Election Commission,
make available to the Election Commission or to a Regional
Commissioner such staff as may be necessary for the
discharge of the functions conferred on the Election
Commission by clause (1).325. There shall be one general electoral roll for everyterritorial constituency for election to either House of
Parliament or to the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State and no person shall be ineligible
for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be included
in any special electoral roll for any such constituency
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of
them.326. The elections to the House of the People and tothe Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the
basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who

is a citizen of India and who is not less than 2[eighteenyears] of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf
by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature
and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution
or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the
ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or
corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered
as a voter at any such election.No person to be
ineligible for
inclusion in, or to
claim to be

included in a
special, electoral
roll on grounds of
religion, race,
caste or sex.Elections to theHouse of the
People and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be on
the basis of adult
suffrage.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956,  s. 29 and Sch.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988,  s. 2, for ﬁtwenty-one
yearsﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XV.
ŠElections.ŠArts. 324Š326.)198 


 327. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,Parliament may from time to time by law make provision
with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection
with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the
House or either House of the Legislature of a State
including the preparation of electoral rolls, the
delimitation of constituencies and all other matters
necessary for securing  the due constitution of such House
or Houses.328. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution andin so far as provision in that behalf is not made by
Parliament, the Legislature of a State may from time to

time by law make provision with respect to all matters
relating to, or in  connection with, the elections to the

House or either House of the Legislature of the State
including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other

matters necessary for securing the due constitution of
such House or Houses.329. 1[Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution2***Š](a) the validity of any law relating to the
delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be
called in question in any court;(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to
the House or either House of the Legislature of a
State shall be called in question except by an election
petition presented to such authority and in such
manner as may be provided for by or under any law
made by the appropriate Legislature.3329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament inthe case of Prime Minister and Speaker.
] Rep. by theConstitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 36 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).Power of
Parliament to make
provision with
respect to elections
to Legislatures.Power ofLegislature of a
State to make
provision with
respect to elections
to such Legislature.
Bar to interferenceby courts in
electoral matters.1Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3, for certain words.2The words, figures and letters ﬁbut subject to the provisions of article 329Aﬂ omittedby the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XV.
ŠElections.ŠArts. 327Š329A.)199 


 PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING
TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of thePeople for Š(a) the Scheduled Castes;1[(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled
Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; and]
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous
districts of Assam.(2) The number of seats reserved in any State 2[orUnion territory] for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of seats allottedto that State 2[or Union territory] in the House of thePeople as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the

State 2[or Union territory] or of the Scheduled Tribes in
the State 2[or Union territory] or part of the State 2[orUnion territory, as the case may be, in respect of which
seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of theState 2[or Union territory].3[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause(2), the number of seats reserved in the House of the
People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous
districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seatsallotted to that State a proportion not less than the
population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous

districts bears to the total population of the State.]4[ExplanationŠIn this article and in article 332, theexpression ﬁpopulationﬂ means the population as200Reservation of seatsfor Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in

the House of the
People.1Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for sub-clause (b)(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,  1956, s. 29 and Sch.
3Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act,  1973, s. 3.
4Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,  1976, s. 47 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
 


 ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published:Provided that the reference in this Explanation to thelast preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published shall, until the relevant figures for thefirst census taken after the year 1[2026] have beenpublished, be construed as a reference to the 2[2001]census.]331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, thePresident may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian
community is not adequately represented in the House of
the People, nominate not more than two members of thatcommunity to the House of the People.332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the ScheduledCastes and the Scheduled Tribes, 
3[except the ScheduledTribes in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the
Legislative Assembly of every State 4***.(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomousdistricts in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.(3) The number of seats reserved for the ScheduledCastes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number
of seats in the Assembly as the population of theScheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes
in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in
respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the totalpopulation of the State.5[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause(3), until the taking effect, under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year6[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative
Representation ofthe Anglo-Indian
Community in the
House of the
People.Reservation of seatsfor Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in

the Legislative
Assemblies of the
States.1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 6, for ﬁ2000ﬂ andﬁ1971ﬂ respectively.
2Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act,  2003, s. 5, for ﬁ1991ﬂ.
3Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for certain words(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
4The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.5Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f.
21-9-1987).6Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for ﬁ2000ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 330Š332.)201 


 Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats which shall be reservedfor the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of
any such State shall be,Š(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly ofsuch State in existence on the date of coming intoforce of the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment)Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as the
existing Assembly) are held by members of theScheduled Tribes, all the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats asbears to the total number of seats, a proportion notless than the number (as on the said date) of membersbelonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing

Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the
existing Assembly.]
1[(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause(3), until the re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effecton the basis of the first census after the year 2[2026], ofthe number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes in the 
Legislative Assembly shall be,
such number of seats as bears to the total number of
seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the
date of coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, of members belonging to
the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in
existence on the said date bears to the total number ofseats in that Assembly.]
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomousdistrict in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assamshall bear to the total number of seats in that Assembly
a proportion not less than the population of the districtbears to the total population of the State.(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for anyautonomous district of Assam shall not comprise anyarea outside that district 3***.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f.
5-12-1992).2Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for ﬁ2000ﬂ.3Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of1971), s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
202THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArt. 332.) 


 (6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled
Tribe of any autonomous district of the State of Assam
shall be eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly
of the State from any constituency of that district 1***:2[Provided that for elections to the LegislativeAssembly of the State of Assam, the representation of the
Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the

constituencies included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas

District, so notified, and existing prior to the constitution
of Bodoland Territorial Areas District, shall be

maintained.]333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, theGovernor 3*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the
Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the
Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately
represented therein, 4[nominate one member of thatcommunity to the Assembly].334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this Part, the provisions of this Constitutionrelating toŠ(a) the reservation of seats for the ScheduledCastes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the

People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States;
and(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indiancommunity in the House of the People and in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination,shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of5[sixty years] from the commencement of this
Constitution:Provided that nothing in this article shall affect anyrepresentation in the House of the People or in the
Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution ofthe then existing House or Assembly, as the case may be.
Representation ofthe Anglo-Indian
community in the
Legislative
Assemblies of the
States.Reservation ofseats and specialrepresentation tocease after 5[sixtyyears].1Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of1971), s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninetieth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2.3The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.4Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4, for ﬁnominate
such number of members of the community to the Assembly as he considers appropriateﬂ.5Subs. by the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 2, for ﬁfifty yearsﬂ(w.e.f. 25-1-2000).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 332Š334.)203 


 335. The claims of the members of the ScheduledCastes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into
consideration, consistently with the maintenance ofefficiency of administration, in the making of
appointments to services and posts in connection withthe affairs of the Union or of a State:1[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent inmaking of any provision in favour of the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in
qualifying marks in any examination or lowering thestandards of evaluation, for reservation in matters of
promotion to any class or classes of services or posts inconnection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.]336. (1) During the first two years after thecommencement of this Constitution, appointments of
members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts in therailway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the
Union shall be made on the same basis as immediately
before the fifteenth day of August, 1947. During every succeeding period of two years, the
number of posts reserved for the members of the saidcommunity in the said services shall, as nearly as possible,
be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reservedduring the immediately preceding period of two years: Provided that at the end of ten years from the
commencement of this Constitution all such reservations
shall cease.(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment ofmembers of the Anglo-Indian community to posts otherthan, or in addition to, those reserved for the communityunder that clause if such members are found qualified
for appointment on merit as compared with the membersof other communities.337.  During the first three financial years after the
commencement of this Constitution, the same grants, if
any, shall be made by the Union and by each State 
2***for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian community in respectof education as were made in the financial year endingon the thirty-first day of March, 1948.Claims ofScheduled Castes

and Scheduled
Tribes to services

and posts.Special provisionfor Anglo-Indian
community in
certain services.Special provisionwith respect to
educational grants
for the benefit of
Anglo-Indian
community.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2.2The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.204THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 335Š337.) 


 During every succeeding period of three years thegrants may be less by ten per cent. than those for theimmediately preceding period of three years :Provided that at the end of ten years from thecommencement of this Constitution such grants, to theextent to which they are a special concession to the Anglo-Indian community, shall cease:
Provided further that no educational institution shallbe entitled to receive any grant under this article unless
at least forty per cent. of the annual admissions therein
are made available to members of communities other
than the Anglo-Indian community.
 338. 
2[(1)  There shall be a Commission for the
Scheduled Castes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes. (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this
behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of theChairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so

appointed shall be such as the President may by rule
determine.](3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal.(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulateits own procedure.(5) It shall be the duty of the CommissionŠ(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relatingto the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes3*** under this Constitution or under any other  law
for the time being in force or under any order of theGovernment and to evaluate the working of suchsafeguards;1Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for the marginalheading (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for cls. (1) and (2) (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
3The words ﬁand Scheduled Tribesﬂ omitted by s. 2, 
ibid. (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
1[NationalCommission for
Scheduled Castes.]THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 337-338.)205 


 (b) to inquire into specific complaints with respectto the deprivation of rights and safeguards of theScheduled Castes 1***;(c) to participate and advise on the planningprocess of socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes 1*** and to evaluate the progress oftheir development under the Union and any State;(d) to present to the President, annually and atsuch other times as the Commission may deem fit,
reports upon the working of those safeguards;(e) to make in such reports recommendations as tothe measures that should be taken by the Unionor any State for the effective implementation of those
safeguards and other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes 1***; and(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to
the protection, welfare and development and
advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1*** as thePresident may, subject to the provisions of any law

made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be
laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to
be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of

such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relatesto any matter with which any State Government is
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to
the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along with amemorandum explaining the action taken or proposed tobe taken on the recommendations relating to the State
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
1The words ﬁand Scheduled Tribesﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
206THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArt. 338.) 


 (8) The Commission shall, while investigating any
matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into anycomplaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have
all the powers of a civil court  trying a suit and in

particular in respect of the following matters,  namely :Š(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance ofany person from any part of India and examining
him on oath;(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereoffrom any court or office;(e) issuing commissions for the examination ofwitnesses and documents;(f) any other matter which the President may, by
rule, determine.(9) The Union and every State Government shallconsult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting Scheduled Castes 1***.]2[(10)] In this article, references to the ScheduledCastes 1*** shall be construed as including references tosuch other backward classes as the President may, on

receipt of the report of a Commission appointed underclause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also to theAnglo-Indian community.
3[338A. (1) There shall be a Commission for theScheduled Tribes to be known as the National

Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in thisbehalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of aChairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the
1The words ﬁand Scheduled Tribesﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2Cl. (3) renumbered as cl. (10) by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990,s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
National
Commission for
Scheduled Tribes.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 338-338A.)207 


 Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so
appointed shall be such as the President by ruledetermine.(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members of  the Commission shall be appointed by the

President by warrant under his hand and seal.(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulateits own procedure.(5) It shall be the duty of the CommissionŠ(a)  to investigate and monitor all matters relating
to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes

under this Constitution or under any other law for
the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such
safeguards;(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect
to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of  the

Scheduled Tribes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planningprocess of socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the progress of their

development under the Union and any State;(d) to present to the President, annually and atsuch other times as the Commission may deem fit,
reports upon the working of those safeguards;(e) to make in such reports recommendations asto the  measures that should be taken by the Union

or any State for the effective implementation  of  those
safeguards and other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Tribes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to
the protection, welfare and development and
advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President

may, subject to the provisions of any law made by

Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to belaid before each House of Parliament along with amemorandum explaining the action taken or proposed
208THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArt. 338A.) 


 to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union
and the reasons for the  non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or  any part thereof, relatesto any matter with which any State Government isconcerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded tothe Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along with amemorandum explaining the action taken or proposed tobe taken on the recommendations relating to the State
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating anymatter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into anycomplaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have
all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and inparticular in respect of the following matters, namely: Š(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance ofany person from any part of  India and examining
him on oath;(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereoffrom any court or office;(e) issuing commissions for the examination ofwitnesses and documents;(f) any other matter which the President may, by
rule, determine.(9) The Union and every State Government shallconsult the Commission on all major policy mattersaffecting Scheduled Tribes.]
339. (1) The President may at any time and shall, atthe expiration of ten years from the commencement ofthis Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and
the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States 
1***.Control of theUnion over the
administration of
Scheduled Areas
and the welfare of
Scheduled Tribes.
1The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A and Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 338A-339.)209 


 The order may define the composition, powers and
procedure of the Commission and may contain suchincidental or ancillary provisions as the President mayconsider necessary or desirable. (2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to
the giving of directions to 1[a State] as to the drawing upand execution of schemes specified in the direction to be
essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the

State.340. (1) The President may by order appoint aCommission consisting of such persons as he thinks fitto investigate the conditions of socially and educationally
backward classes within the territory of India and the
difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by
the Union or any State to remove such difficulties and toimprove their condition and as to the grants that  should
be made for the purpose by the Union or any State and
the conditions subject to which such grants should be
made, and the order appointing such Commission shall
define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate thematters referred to them and present to the President areport setting out the facts as found by them and makingsuch recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report sopresented together with a memorandum explaining the
action taken thereon to be laid before each House of

Parliament.341. (1) The President 2[may with respect to any State3[or Union territory], and where it is a State 4***,after consultation with the Governor 
5*** thereof,] byAppointment of aCommission to
investigate the
conditions of
backward classes.Scheduled Castes.1Subs by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ﬁany suchStateﬂ.2Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 10, for ﬁmay, after consultation
with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a Stateﬂ.3Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.4The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bys. 29 and Sch., ibid.5The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.210THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 339Š341.) 


 public notification
1, specify the castes, races or tribes or
parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes whichshall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed tobe Scheduled Castes in relation to that State 2[or Unionterritory, as the case may be].
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude fromthe list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notificationissued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of
or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save asaforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shallnot be varied by any subsequent notification.342. (1) The President 3[may with respect to any State2[or Union territory], and where it is a State 4***, afterconsultation with the Governor 5*** thereof,] by publicnotification6, specify the tribes or tribal communities orparts of or groups within tribes or tribal communitieswhich shall for the purposes of this Constitution be
deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State
2[or Union territory, as the case may be].
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude fromthe list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification
issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community orpart of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but

save as aforesaid a notification issued under the saidclause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
Scheduled Tribes.
1See the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 19), the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories)  Order, 1951 (C.O. 32), the Constitution (Jammu and

Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 (C.O. 52), the Constitution (Dadra and Nagar

Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 1962 (C.O. 64), the Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled

Castes Order, 1964 (C.O. 68), the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Castes

Order, 1968 (C.O. 81) and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 (C.O.

110).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.3Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 11, for ﬁmay, after consultation
with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State,ﬂ.4The words and letters ﬁSpecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted bythe Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.5The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.6See the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 22), the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 33), the Constitution (Andaman

and Nicobar Islands) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1959 (C.O. 58), the Constitution (Dadra and

Nagar Haveli) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1962 (C.O. 65), the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)

(Uttar Pradesh)  Order, 1967 (C.O. 78), the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled

Tribes Order, 1968 (C.O. 82), the 
Constitution (Nagaland) Scheduled Tribes 
Order, 1970
(C.O. 88)  and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 (C.O. 111).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVI.ŠSpecial Provisions relating to certainClasses.ŠArts. 341-342.)211
 


 PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGECHAPTER I.ŠL
ANGUAGE OF THE UNION343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be
Hindi in Devanagari script.The form of numerals to be used for the officialpurposes of the Union shall be the international form of
Indian numerals.(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for aperiod of fifteen years from the commencement of this
Constitution, the English language shall continue to beused for all the official purposes of the Union for whichit was being used immediately before such

commencement:Provided that the President may, during the said
period, by order1 authorise the use of the Hindi language
in addition to the English language and of the Devanagariform of numerals in addition to the international form ofIndian numerals for any of the official purposes of the
Union.(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article,
Parliament may by law provide for the use, after the said
period of fifteen years, ofŠ(a) the English language, or(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
344. (1) The President shall, at the expiration of fiveyears from the commencement of this Constitution and
thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such
commencement, by order constitute a Commission which
shall consist of a Chairman and such other members
representing the different languages specified in the EighthSchedule as the President may appoint, and the order2121See C.O. 41.
Official languageof the Union.Commission andCommittee of
Parliament on
official language. 


 shall define the procedure to be followed by theCommission.(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to makerecommendations to the President as toŠ(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language forthe official purposes of the Union;(b) restrictions on the use of the English languagefor all or any of the official purposes of the Union;(c) the language to be used for all or any of thepurposes mentioned in article 348;(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one ormore specified purposes of the Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission bythe President as regards the official language of the
Union and the language for communication between
the Union and a State or between one State and
another and their use.(3) In making their recommendations underclause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the
industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India,
and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging
to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public
services.(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consistingof thirty members, of whom twenty shall be members of
the House of the People and ten shall be members of the
Council of States to be elected respectively by the
members of the House of the People and the members
of the Council of States in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote.(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examinethe recommendations of the Commission constituted

under clause (1) and to report to the President their
opinion thereon.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVII.ŠOfficial Language.ŠArt. 344.)213 


 (6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, thePresident may, after consideration of the report referred

to in clause (5), issue directions in accordance with the
whole or any part of that report.CHAPTER II.ŠREGIONAL LANGUAGES345. Subject to the provisions of articles 346 and 347,the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any one or
more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the
language or languages to be used for all or any of the

official purposes of that State:Provided that, until the Legislature of the Stateotherwise provides by law, the English language shall

continue to be used for those official purposes within the
State for which it was being used immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution.346. The language for the time being authorised foruse in the Union for official purposes shall be the official
language for communication between one State and
another State and between a State and the Union:Provided that if two or more States agree that theHindi language should be the official language for
communication between such States, that language may
be used for such communication.347. On a demand being made in that behalf thePresident may, if he is satisfied that a substantial

proportion of the population of a State desire the use of
any language spoken by them to be recognised by that
State, direct that such language shall also be officially
recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for
such purpose as he may specify.
CHAPTER III.ŠLANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT
,HIGH COURTS, ETC.348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise
providesŠ(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and inevery High Court,Official language
or languages of a
State.Official languagefor communication
between one State
and another or
between a State
and the Union.Language to beused in the

Supreme Court and
in the High Courts
and for Acts, Bills,
etc.Special provisionrelating to language
spoken by a section
of the population
of a State.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVII.ŠOfficial Language.ŠArts. 344Š348.)214 


 (b) the authoritative textsŠ(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendmentsthereto to be moved in either House of Parliament
or in the House or either House of the Legislature
of a State,(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or theLegislature of a State and of all Ordinances
promulgated by the President or the Governor 1***of a State, and(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws
issued under this Constitution or under any law
made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,shall be in the English language.(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (
a) ofclause (1), the Governor 1*** of a State may, with the
previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the
Hindi language, or any other language used for any official
purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court
having its principal seat in that State:Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply toany judgment, decree or order passed or made by such
High Court.(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) ofclause (1), where the Legislature of a State has prescribed
any language other than the English language for use in
Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of

the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor1*** of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or
bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause,a translation of the same in the English language
published under the authority of the Governor 1*** of theState in the Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed
to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language
under this article.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVII.ŠOfficial Language.ŠArt. 348.)215 


 349. During the period of fifteen years from thecommencement of this Constitution, no Bill or amendment
making provision for the language to be used for any of
the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall

be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament
without the previous sanction of the President, and thePresident shall not give his sanction to the introductionof any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment
except after he has taken into consideration the
recommendations of the Commission constituted under
clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee
constituted under clause (4) of that article.CHAPTER IV.ŠS
PECIAL DIRECTIVES350. Every person shall be entitled to submit arepresentation for the redress of any grievance to any
officer or authority of the Union or a State in any of the
languages used in the Union or in the State, as the casemay be.1[350A. It shall be the endeavour of every State andof every local authority within the State to provideadequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue atthe primary stage of education to children belonging to
linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue

such directions to any State as he considers necessary or
proper for securing the provision of such facilities.350B. (1) There shall be a Special Officer for linguisticminorities to be appointed by the President.(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer toinvestigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided
for linguistic minorities under this Constitution andreport to the President upon those matters at suchintervals as the President may direct, and the President
shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House
of Parliament, and sent to the Governments of the States
concerned.]351. It shall be the duty of the Union to promote thespread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it maySpecial procedurefor enactment of
certain laws
relating to
language.Language to beused in
representations for
redress of
grievances.Facilities forinstruction in
mother-tongue at
primary stage.Special Officer forlinguistic
minorities.Directive fordevelopment of the
Hindi language.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh  Amendment)  Act, 1956,  s. 21.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVII.ŠOfficial Language.ŠArts. 349Š351.)216 


 serve as a medium of expression for all the elements ofthe composite culture of India and to secure its
enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its
genius, the forms, style and expressions used in
Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified
in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever
necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on

Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVII.ŠOfficial Language.ŠArt. 351.)217 


 PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS352. (1) If the President is satisfied that a graveemergency exists whereby the security of India or of any
part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by
war or external aggression or 
1[armed rebellion], he may,
by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect 2[inrespect of the whole of India or of such part of the
territory thereof as may be specified in the Proclamation].3[Explanation.ŠA Proclamation of Emergencydeclaring that the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before
the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or
rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is imminent
danger thereof.]4[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may bevaried or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation underclause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation

unless the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say,

the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other
Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75)
that such a Proclamation may be issued has been
communicated to him in writing.(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shallbe laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except
where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one
month unless before the expiration of that period it has
been approved by resolutions of both Houses of
Parliament:218Proclamation ofEmergency.
1Subs by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37, for ﬁinternaldisturbanceﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by  the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4 Subs. by s. 37, 
ibid., for cls. (2), (2A) and (3) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
 


 Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being aProclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issuedat a time when the House of the People has been dissolved,
or the dissolution of the House of the People takes placeduring the period of one month referred to in this clause,and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been
passed by the Council of States, but no resolution withrespect to such Proclamation  has been passed by the
House of the People before the expiration of that period,
the Proclamation  shall cease to operate at the expiration
of thirty days from the date on which the House of thePeople first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolutionapproving  the Proclamation has been also passed by the
House of the People.(5) A Proclamation  so approved shall, unless revoked,cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six monthsfrom the date of the passing of the second of theresolutions approving the Proclamation  under clause

(4):Provided that if and so often as a resolutionapproving the continuance in force of such a Proclamationis passed by both Houses of Parliament the Proclamationshall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period
of six months from the date on which it would otherwisehave ceased to operate under this clause:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the Houseof the People takes place during any such period of sixmonths and a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such Proclamation has been passed by theCouncil of States but no resolution with respect to thecontinuance in force of such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People during the said period,the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expirationof thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before theexpiration of the said period  of thirty days, a resolution
approving the continuance in force  of the Proclamation

has been also passed by the House of the People.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 352.)219 


 (6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolutionmay be passed by either House of Parliament only by a
majority of the total membership of that House and by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of
that House present and voting.(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in theforegoing clauses, the President shall revoke a
Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation
varying such Proclamation if the House of the People
passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be,

disapproving the continuance in force  of, such

Proclamation.(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less thanone-tenth of the total number of members of the House of
the People  has been given, of their intention to move a

resolution for disapproving, or, as the case may be, for

disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation
issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation  varying such

Proclamation,Š(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or
(b) to the President, if the House  is not in session,
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteendays from the date on which such notice is received by
the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the President, for

the purpose  of considering such resolution.]
1[2[(9)] The power conferred on the President by thisarticle shall include the power  to issue different

Proclamations  on different grounds, being war or external
aggression or 3[armed rebellion] or imminent danger ofwar or external aggression or 3[armed rebellion], whetheror not there is a Proclamation  already issued by the

President under clause (1) and such Proclamation  is in

operation.4*               *               *               *          *]
1Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (retrospectively).2Cl. (4) re-numbered as cl. (9) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,s. 37 (w.e.f 20-6-1979).
3Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for ﬁinternal disturbanceﬂ (w.e.f 20-6-1979).
4Cl. (5) omitted by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 352.)220 


 353. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, thenŠ(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,the executive power  of the Union shall extend to the

giving of directions to any State as to the manner

in which the executive power  thereof is to be

exercised;(b) the power of Parliament to make laws withrespect to any matter shall include power to make
laws conferring powers and imposing  duties, or

authorising the conferring of powers and the
imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and
authorities of the Union as respects that matter,

notwithstanding that it is one which is not
enumerated in the Union List:1[Provided that where  a Proclamation  of Emergencyis in operation only in any part of the territory of India,Š(i) the executive power of the Union to givedirections under clause (a), and(ii) the power of Parliament to make laws underclause (b),shall also extend to any State other than  a State in which
or in any part of which the Proclamation  of Emergency

is in operation if and in so far as the security of India or
any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities
in or in relation to the part  of the territory of India in

which the Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation.]
354. (1) The President  may, while a Proclamation  of
Emergency is in operation, by order  direct that all or any
of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such
period, not extending in any case beyond the expiration
of the financial year in which such Proclamation  ceases

to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect

subject  to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks

fit.Effect of
Proclamation of
Emergency.
Application ofprovisions relating
to distribution of
revenues while a
Proclamation of
Emergency is in
operation.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act 1976, s. 49 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 353-354.)221 


 (2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soonas may be after it is made, be laid before each House of
Parliament.355. It shall be the duty of the Union to protect everyState  against external aggression and internal disturbance
and to ensure that the Government of every State  is

carried on in accordance with the provisions of this
Constitution.356. (1) If the President, on receipt of a report from theGovernor 1*** of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that asituation has arisen in which the Government of the State
cannot be carried  on  in accordance with the provisions

of this Constitution, the President may by ProclamationŠ(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of
the Government of the State and all or any of the
powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor 2***or any body or authority in the State  other than the

Legislature of the State;(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of theState shall be exercisable by or under the authority
of Parliament;(c) make such incidental and consequentialprovisions as appear to the President to be necessary
or desirable for giving effect to the objects of the
Proclamation, including provisions for suspending
in whole or in part the operation of any provisions
of this Constitution relating to any body or authority
in the State:Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorisethe President to assume to himself any of the powers
vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend

in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this
Constitution relating to High Courts.Duty of the Union
to protect States
against external
aggression and
internal
disturbance.Provisions in caseof failure of
constitutional
machinery in
States.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬁ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.2The words ﬁor Rajpramukh, as the case may beﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 354Š356.)222 


 (2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or variedby a subsequent Proclamation.(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall belaid before  each House of Parliament and shall, except

where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two
months unless before the expiration of that period it has
been approved by resolutions of both Houses of
Parliament:Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being aProclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued
at a time when the House of the People is dissolved or
the dissolution of the House of the People takes place

during the period of two months referred to in this clause,
and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been
passed by the Council of States, but no  resolution with

respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People before the expiration of that period,
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the
House of the People.(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked,cease to operate on the expiration of a period of 1[sixmonths from the date of issue of the Proclamation]:Provided that if and so often as a resolution approvingthe continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed
by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless
revoked, continue in force for a further period of2[six months] from the date on  which under this clause it
1Subs. by  the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for ﬁone year
from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation
under clause (3)ﬂ (w.e.f.  20-6-1979). The words ﬁone yearﬂ were subs. for the original words

ﬁsix monthsﬂ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f.

3-1-1977).2Subs. by  the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for ﬁone yearﬂ
(w.e.f.  20-6-1979). The words ﬁone yearﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁsix monthsﬂ by

the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 356.)223 


 would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no suchProclamation shall  in any case remain in force  for more

than three years:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the Houseof the People takes place during any such period of 1[sixmonths] and a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council
of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance
in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People during the said period, the
Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of
thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation
has been also passed by the House of the People:2[Provided also that in the case of the Proclamationissued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with

respect to the State  of Punjab, the reference in the first

proviso to this clause to ﬁthree yearsﬂ shall be construed
as a reference to 3[five years].]4[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause(4), a resolution with respect to the continuance in force
of a Proclamation approved under clause (3) for any
period beyond the expiration of one year from the date of
issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament unlessŠ(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation,in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in the

whole or any part of the State, at the time of the
passing of such resolution, and1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for ﬁone yearﬁ(w.e.f.  20-6-1979). The words ﬁone yearﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁsix monthsﬂ by

the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2.3Successively subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1990,  s. 2 and
the Constitution (Sixty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 to read as above.
4Subs by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for cl. (5) (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 6
(retrospectively).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 356.)224 


 (b) the Election Commission certifies that thecontinuance in force of the Proclamation approved
under clause (3) during the period specified in such
resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly
of the State concerned:]1[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply tothe Proclamation issued under clause (1) on the 11th day

of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab.]
357. (1) Where by a Proclamation issued under clause (1)of article 356, it has been declared that the powers of the
Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under

the authority of Parliament, it shall be competentŠ(a) for Parliament to confer on the President thepower of the Legislature of the State to make laws,
and to authorise the President to delegate, subject to
such conditions as he may think fit to impose, the
power so conferred to any other authority to be
specified by him in that behalf;(b) for Parliament, or for the President or otherauthority in whom such power to make laws is
vested under sub-clause (a), to make laws conferringpowers and imposing duties, or authorising the
conferring of powers and the imposition of
duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities

thereof;(c) for the President to authorise when the Houseof the People is not in session expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of the State pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.5[(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of theLegislature of the State by Parliament or the President or
other authority referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1)Exercise oflegislative powers
under Proclamation
issued under article
356.1Omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2.2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 51, for cl. (2)(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 356-357.)225 


 which Parliament or the President or such other authoritywould not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under
article 356, have been competent to make shall, after the
Proclamation has ceased to operate, continue in force

until altered or repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other authority.]
358. 1[(1)] 2[While a Proclamation of Emergencydeclaring that the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression is in operation], nothing in article 19 shall
restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to
make any law or to take any executive action which the
State would but for the provisions contained in that Part
be competent to make or to take, but any law so made
shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have

effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except
as respects things done or omitted to be done before the

law so ceases to have effect:3[Provided that 4[where such Proclamation ofEmergency] is in operation only in any part of the territory
of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive
action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in
any State or Union territory in which or in any part of
which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation,
if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation
to the part of the territory of India in which the
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.]5[(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall applyŠ(a) to any law which does not contain a recitalto the effect that such law is in relation to the
Suspension of
provisions of
article 19 during
emergencies.1Art. 358 re-numbered as cl. (1) thereof by by  the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for ﬁWhile a Proclamation of Emergency is in operationﬂ (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 52 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4 Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 39, for ﬁwhere a
Proclamation of Emergencyﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
5Ins. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 357-358.)226 


 Suspension of the
enforcement of the
rights conferred by
Part III during
emergencies.Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is
made; or(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than
under a law containing such a recital.]359. (1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is inoperation, the President may by order declare that the
right to move any court for the enforcement of such of1[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and
21)] as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings
pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so
mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during
which the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter
period as may be specified in the order.
2[(1A) While an order made under clause (1)mentioning any of 1[the rights conferred by Part III(except articles 20 and 21)] is in operation, nothing in
that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power
of the State as defined in the said Part to make any law
or to take any executive action which the State would
but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent
to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon

as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as respects
things done or omitted to be done before the law so
ceases to have effect:]3[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergencyis in operation only in any part of the territory of India,
any such law may be made, or any such executive action
may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any
State or Union territory in which or in any part of which
the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if

and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in
relation to the part of the territory of India in which the
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.]1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40,  for ﬁthe rights
conferred by Part IIIﬂ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 7 (retrospectively).3Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 358-359.)227 


 1[(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall applyŠ(a) to any law which does not contain a recital tothe effect that such law is in relation to the
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is
made; or(b) to any executive action taken otherwise thanunder a law containing such a recital.](2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to thewhole or any part of the territory of India:2[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergencyis in operation only in a part of the territory of India, any
such order shall not extend to any other part of the territory
of India unless the President, being satisfied that the
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is
threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the
territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation, considers such extension to be necessary.]
(3) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soonas may be after it is made, be laid before each House of
Parliament.3359A. [Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.]Rep. by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act,
 1989,s. 3 (w.e.f.
 6-1-1990).360. (1) If the President is satisfied that a situationhas arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of
India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened,
he may by a Proclamation make a declaration to that
effect.4[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)Š(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequentProclamation;Provisions as to
financial
emergency.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 3. It shall cease tooperate on the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act, i.e.,thirtieth day of March, 1988.
4Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41, for cl. (2) (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArts. 359Š360.)228 


 (b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament;(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of twomonths, unless before the expiration of that period

it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses
of Parliament:Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued ata time when the House of the People has been dissolved
or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place
during the period of two months referred to in sub-
clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamationhas been passed by the Council of States, but no

resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People before the expiration
of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at

the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless
before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a
resolution approving the Proclamation has been also
passed by the House of the People.](3) During the period any such Proclamation as ismentioned in clause (1) is in operation, the executive

authority of the Union shall extend to the giving of
directions to any State to observe such canons of financial
propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the
giving of such other directions as the President may deem
necessary and adequate for the purpose.(4) Notwithstanding anything in this ConstitutionŠ(a) any such direction may includeŠ(i) a provision requiring the reduction ofsalaries and allowances of all or any class of
persons serving in connection with the affairs of
a State;(ii) a provision requiring all Money Bills orother Bills to which the provisions of article 207
apply to be reserved for the consideration of the
President after they are passed by the Legislature
of the State;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 360.)229 


 (b) it shall be competent for the President duringthe period any Proclamation issued under this article
is in operation to issue directions for the reduction of
salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union
including the Judges of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts.1*               *               *               *               *
1Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 8(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 41 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XVIII.ŠEmergency Provisions.ŠArt. 360.)230 


 PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS361. (1) The President, or the Governor or
Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be answerable to anycourt for the exercise and performance of the powers
and duties of his office or for any act done or purportingto be done by him in the exercise and performance ofthose powers and duties:Provided that the conduct of the President may bebrought under review by any court, tribunal or body
appointed or designated by either House of Parliamentfor the investigation of a charge under article 61:Provided further that nothing in this clause shall beconstrued as restricting the right of any person to bring
appropriate proceedings against the Government of India
or the Government of a State.(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall beinstituted or continued against the President, or the
Governor 1*** of a State, in any court during his term ofoffice.(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of thePresident, or the Governor 1*** of a State, shall issuefrom any court during his term of office.(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimedagainst the President, or the Governor 1*** of a State,shall be instituted during his term of office in any courtin respect of any act done or purporting to be done by
him in his personal capacity, whether before or after he

entered upon his office as President, or as Governor 1***of such State, until the expiration of two months next
after notice in writing has been delivered to the Presidentor the Governor 2***, as the case may be, or left at hisoffice stating the nature of the proceedings, the cause ofaction therefor, the name, description and place of
231Protection ofPresident and
Governors and
Rajpramukhs.1The words ﬁor Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,1956, s. 29 and Sch.2The words ﬁor the Rajpramukhﬂ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. 


 residence of the party by whom such proceedings are to
be instituted and the relief which he claims.
1[361A. (1) No person shall be liable to anyproceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of
the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true
report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament
or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either

House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication
is proved to have been made with malice:Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply tothe publication of any report of the proceedings of a
secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House

of the Legislature, of a State.(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports ormatters broadcast by means of wireless telegraphy as
part of any programme or service provided by means of
a broadcasting station as it applies in relation to reports
or matters published in a newspaper.
Explanation.ŠIn this article, ﬁnewspaperﬂ includes anews agency report containing material for publication
in a newspaper.]
   2[361B. A member of a House belonging to anypolitical party who is disqualified for being a member of
the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall

also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political
post for duration of the period commencing from  the

date of his disqualification  till the date on which the

term of his office as such member would expire or till the
date on which he contests an election to a House and is
declared  elected, whichever is earlier.
Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article,Š(a) the expression ﬁHouseﬂ has the meaning
assigned to it in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the

Tenth Schedule;
Protection of
publication of
proceedings of
Parliament and
State Legislatures.Disqualificationfor appointment
on remunerative
political post.1Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 42 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).2Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003,  s. 4.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArts. 361Š361B.)232 


 (b) the expression ﬁremunerative political postﬂ
means any officeŠ(i) under the Government of India or the
Government of a State where the salary orremuneration for such office is paid out of the
public revenue of the Government of India or
the Government of the State, as the case may be;or(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or
not, which is wholly or partially owned by theGovernment of India or the Government of aState and the salary or remuneration for such
office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid iscompensatory in nature.362. [Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.]Rep. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment)
 Act,1971, s. 2.363. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution but subject to the provisions of article 143,neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have
jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provisionof a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, 
sanad or
other similar instrument which was entered into or
executed before the commencement of this Constitutionby any Ruler of an Indian State and to which theGovernment of the Dominion of India or any of its
predecessor Governments was a party and which has orhas been continued in operation after such commencement,or in any dispute in respect of any right accruing under
or any liability or obligation arising out of any of theprovisions of this Constitution relating to any such treaty,
agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar
instrument.(2) In this articleŠ(a) ﬁIndian Stateﬂ means any territory recognisedbefore the commencement of this Constitution by HisMajesty or the Government of the Dominion of Indiaas being such a State; and(b) ﬁRulerﬂ includes the Prince, Chief or other
person recognised before such commencement by
His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion ofIndia as the Ruler of any Indian State.Bar to interferenceby courts in
disputes arising
out of certain
treaties,
agreements, etc.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArts. 361BŠ363.)233 


 1[363A. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution or in any law for the time being in forceŠ(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at anytime before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 
1971, was recognised
by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State or
any person who, at any time before such
commencement, was recognised by the President as
the successor of such ruler shall, on and from such
commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler
or the successor of such Ruler;(b) on and from the commencement of theConstitution (Twenty-sixth 
Amendment) Act, 1971,
privy purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and
obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished
and accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the

successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (
a) orany other person shall not be paid any sum as privy
purse.]364. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, the President may by public notification
direct that as from such date as may be specified in the
notificationŠ(a) any law made by Parliament or by the
Legislature of a State shall not apply to any major
port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto subject to
such exceptions or modifications as may be specified
in the notification, or(b) any existing law shall cease to have effect inany major port or aerodrome except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the said date, or
shall in its application to such port or aerodrome
have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications
as may be specified in the notification.(2) In this articleŠ(a) ﬁmajor portﬂ means a port declared to be a
major port by or under any law made by Parliament
or any existing law and includes all areas for the
time being included within the limits of such port;(b) ﬁaerodromeﬂ means aerodrome as defined forthe purposes of the enactments relating to airways,aircraft and air navigation.
Recognitiongranted to Rulers
of Indian States
to cease and
privy purses to
be abolished.1Ins. by  the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971,  s. 3.
Special provisions
as to major ports
and aerodromes.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArts. 363A-364.)234 


 365. Where any State has failed to comply with, or to
give effect to, any directions given in the exercise of theexecutive power of the Union under any of the provisionsof this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the President tohold that a situation has arisen in which the Governmentof the State cannot be carried on in accordance with theprovisions of this Constitution.366. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwiserequires, the following expressions have the meaningshereby respectively assigned to them, that is to sayŠ(1) ﬁagricultural incomeﬂ means agriculturalincome as defined for the purposes of the enactmentsrelating to Indian income-tax;(2) ﬁan Anglo-Indianﬂ means a person whosefather or any of whose other male progenitors in themale line is or was of European descent but who isdomiciled within the territory of India and is or wasborn within such territory of parents habituallyresident therein and not established there fortemporary purposes only;(3) ﬁarticleﬂ means an article of this Constitution;
(4) ﬁborrowﬂ includes the raising of money by thegrant of annuities, and ﬁloanﬂ shall be construedaccordingly;1*                  *                   *                     *
(5) ﬁclauseﬂ means a clause of the article in whichthe expression occurs;(6) ﬁcorporation taxﬂ means any tax on income,so far as that tax is payable by companies and is atax in the case of which the following conditions arefulfilled:Š(a) that it is not chargeable in respect ofagricultural income;(b) that no deduction in respect of the taxpaid by companies is, by any enactments whichmay apply to the tax, authorised to be madefrom dividends payable by the companies toindividuals;(c) that no provision exists for taking the tax
so paid into account in computing for the
Effect of failureto comply with,
or to give effect
to, directions
given by the
Union.Definitions.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArts. 365-366.)2351Cl. (4A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11

(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
 


 purposes of Indian income-tax the total income
of individuals receiving such dividends, or incomputing the Indian income-tax payable by, or
refundable to, such individuals;(7) ﬁcorresponding Provinceﬂ, ﬁcorrespondingIndian Stateﬂ or ﬁcorresponding Stateﬂ means incases of doubt such Province, Indian State or State asmay be determined by the President to be thecorresponding Province, the corresponding IndianState or the corresponding State, as the case may be,for the particular purpose in question;(8) ﬁdebtﬂ includes any liability in respect of anyobligation to repay capital sums by way of annuitiesand any liability under any guarantee, and ﬁdebtchargesﬂ shall be construed accordingly;(9) ﬁestate dutyﬂ means a duty to be assessed onor by reference to the principal value, ascertained inaccordance with such rules as may be prescribed byor under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature
of a State relating to the duty, of all property passing
upon death or deemed, under the provisions of the
said laws, so to pass;(10) ﬁexisting lawﬂ means any law, Ordinance,
order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or made
before the commencement of this Constitution by anyLegislature, authority or person having power tomake such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or
regulation;(11) ﬁFederal Courtﬂ means the Federal Court
constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935;(12) ﬁgoodsﬂ includes all materials, commodities,and articles;(13) ﬁguaranteeﬂ includes any obligationundertaken before the commencement of thisConstitution to make payments in the event of theprofits of an undertaking falling short of a specifiedamount;(14) ﬁHigh Courtﬂ means any Court which is
deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to be aHigh Court for any State and includesŠ(a) any Court in the territory of Indiaconstituted or reconstituted under this Constitutionas a High Court, andTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArt. 366.)236 


 (b) any other Court in the territory of India
which may be declared by Parliament by law to
be a High Court for all or any of the purposes ofthis Constitution;(15) ﬁIndian Stateﬂ means any territory whichthe Government of the Dominion of India recognised
as such a State;(16) ﬁPartﬂ  means a Part of this Constitution;

(17) ﬁpensionﬂ means a pension, whether
contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable
to or in respect of any person, and includes retiredpay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sumor sums so payable by way of the return, with or
without interest thereon or any other additionthereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;(18) ﬁProclamation of Emergencyﬂ means aProclamation issued under clause (1) of article 352;
(19) ﬁpublic notificationﬂ means a notification in
the Gazette of India, or, as the case may be, the Official

Gazette of a State;(20) ﬁrailwayﬂ does not includeŠ(a) a tramway wholly within a municipal area,or(b) any other line of communication whollysituate in one State and declared by Parliament by
law not to be a railway;1*           *           *           *           *           *
2[(22) ﬁRulerﬂ means the Prince, Chief or otherperson who, at any time before the commencement ofthe Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act,
1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler

of an Indian State or any person who, at any timebefore such commencement, was recognised by thePresident as the successor of such Ruler;](23) ﬁScheduleﬂ means a Schedule to thisConstitution;(24) ﬁScheduled Castesﬂ means such castes, racesor tribes or parts of or groups within such castes,1Cl. (21) omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.2Subs. by  the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for cl. (22).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArt. 366.)237 


 races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be
Scheduled Castes for the purposes of thisConstitution;(25) ﬁScheduled Tribesﬂ means such tribes or
tribal communities or parts of or groups within suchtribes or tribal communities as are deemed under
article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of
this Constitution;(26) ﬁsecuritiesﬂ includes stock;
1*           *           *           *           *           *
(27) ﬁsub-clauseﬂ means a sub-clause of the clausein which the expression occurs;(28) ﬁtaxationﬂ includes the imposition of any taxor impost, whether general or local or special, and
ﬁtaxﬂ shall be construed accordingly;(29) ﬁtax on incomeﬂ includes a tax in the natureof an excess profits tax;2[(29A) ﬁtax on the sale or purchase of goodsﬂincludesŠ(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in
pursuance of a contract, of property in any goodsfor cash, deferred payment or other valuableconsideration;(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods(whether as goods or in some other form)
involved in the execution of a works contract;(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-
purchase or any system of payment byinstalments;(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use
any goods for any purpose (whether or not for aspecified period) for cash, deferred payment orother valuable consideration;
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by anyunincorporated association or body of personsto a member thereof for cash, deferred paymentor other valuable consideration;1Cl. (26A) was ins. by  the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,  s. 54
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11

(w.e.f.  13-4-1978).
2Ins. by  the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982,  s. 4.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArt. 366.)238 


 (f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part
of any service or in any other manner
whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other

article for human consumption or any drink
(whether or not intoxicating), where such supply
or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other
valuable consideration,and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall
be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person
making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase

of those goods by the person to whom such transfer,

delivery or supply is made;]1[(30) ﬁUnion territoryﬂ means any Unionterritory specified in the First Schedule and includes
any other territory comprised within the territory of
India but not specified in that Schedule.]367. (1) Unless the context otherwise requires, theGeneral Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject to anyadaptations and modifications that may be made thereinunder article 372, apply for the interpretation of this
Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act
of the Legislature of the Dominion of India.(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or lawsof, or made by, Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, or

made by, the Legislature of a State 
2***, shall be construed
as including a reference to an Ordinance made by the
President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor 
3***,as the case may be.(3) For the purposes of this Constitution ﬁforeign
Stateﬂ means any State other than India:Provided that, subject to the provisions of any lawmade by Parliament, the President may by order4 declare
any State not to be a foreign State for such purposes as
may be specified in the order.
Interpretation.1Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for cl. (30).2The words and letters ﬁspecified in Part A or Part B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid.3The words ﬁor Rajpramukh ﬁ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.4See the Constitution (Declaration as to Foreign States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 2).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XIX.ŠMiscellaneous.ŠArts. 366-367.)239 


 PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION368. 2[(1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent
power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any
provision of this Constitution in accordance with the
procedure laid down in this article.]3[(2)] An amendment of this Constitution may beinitiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose
in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed
in each House by a majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of the members of that House present and voting, 4[itshall be presented to the President who shall give his
assent to the Bill and thereupon] the Constitution shall
stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any
change inŠ(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162 orarticle 241, or(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or
Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or(e) the provisions of this article,the amendment shall also require to be ratified by theLegislatures of not less than one-half of the States 5*** byresolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures2401[Power ofParliament to
amend the
Constitution and
procedure
therefor.]
1Subs.  by  the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3, for ﬁProcedure
for the amendment of the Constitutionﬂ.2Ins. by s. 3, ibid.3Art. 368 renumbered as cl. (2) thereof by s. 3, ibid.4Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for ﬁit shall be presented to the President for his assent and uponsuch assent being given to the Bill,ﬂ.5The words and letters ﬁspecified in Parts A and B of the First Scheduleﬂ omitted by theConstitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 


 before the Bill making provision for such amendment ispresented to the President for assent.1[(3) Nothing in article 13 shall apply to anyamendment made under this article.]2[(4) No amendment of this Constitution (includingthe provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have
been made under this article [whether before or after the
commencement of section 55 of the Constitution (Forty-
second Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question
in any court on any ground. (5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that there shall be no limitation whatever on the
constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of
addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this
Constitution under this article.]1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3.
2Cls. (4) and (5) were ins. in article 368 by s. 55 of the Constitution (Forty-secondAmendment) Act, 1976. This section has been declared invalid by the Supreme Court in
Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others (1980) 2 S.C.C. 591.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XX.ŠAmendment of the Constitution.ŠArt. 368.)241 


 PART XXI
1[TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL
AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS]369. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
Parliament shall, during a period of five years fromthe commencement of this Constitution, have powerto make laws with respect to the following matters as
if they were enumerated in the Concurrent List,namely:Š(a) trade and commerce within a State in, andthe production, supply and distribution of, cotton
and woollen textiles, raw cotton (including ginnedcotton and unginned cotton or kapas), cottonseed, paper (including newsprint), food-stuffs(including edible oilseeds and oil), cattle fodder(including oil-cakes and other concentrates), coal
(including coke and derivatives of coal), iron, steel
and mica;
(b) offences against laws with respect to any ofthe matters mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction andpowers of all courts except the Supreme Court withrespect to any of those matters, and fees in respectof any of those matters but not including fees taken
in any court;but any law made by Parliament, which Parliamentwould not but for the provisions of this article have
been competent to make, shall, to the extent of theincompetency, cease to have ef
fect on the expiration ofthe said period, except as respects things done oromitted to be done before the expiration thereof.
242Temporary power
to Parliament to
make laws with
respect to certain
matters in the State
List as if they were
matters in the
Concurrent List.1Subs. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2, for ﬁTEMPORARYAND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONSﬂ 
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
 


 1[370. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply inrelation to the State of  Jammu and Kashmir;
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for thesaid State shall be limited toŠ(i) those matters in the Union List and  the
Concurrent List which, in consultation with the
Government  of the State, are declared by the

President to correspond to matters specified in

the Instrument of Accession governing the
accession of the State to the Dominion  of India as

the matters with respect to which the Dominion
Legislature may make laws for that State; and(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, withthe concurrence of the Government of the State,
the President may by order specify.
Explanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, theGovernment of the State means the person for the time
being recognised by the President as the Maharaja of
Jammu  and Kashmir acting on the advice of the Council

of Ministers for the time being in office under the
Maharaja™s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March,
1948;(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this articleshall apply in relation to that State;(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitutionshall apply in relation to that State subject to suchTemporary

provisions with
respect to the State
of Jammu and
Kashmir.
1In exercise of the powers conferred by this article the President, on the recommendationof the Constituent Assembly of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, declared that, as from the

17th day of November, 1952, the said art. 370 shall be operative with the modification that
for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the following
 Explanation
 is substituted, namely:Š
ﬁExplanation.ŠFor the purposes of this article, the Government of the State meansthe person for the time being recognised by the President on the recommendation of the
Legislative Assembly of the State as the *Sadar-I-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir,

acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in office.ﬂ.(Ministry of Law Order No. C.O. 44, dated the 15th November, 1952).

*Now ﬁGovernorﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 370.)243 


 exceptions and modifications as the President may
by order1 specify:
Provided that no such order which relates to thematters specified in the Instrument of Accession of
the State referred to in paragraph (i) of sub-clause (b)shall be issued except in consultation with theGovernment of the State:Provided further that no such order which relatesto matters other than those referred to in the lastpreceding proviso shall be issued except with theconcurrence of that Government.(2) If the concurrence of  the Government of the State
referred to in paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause (1)or in the second proviso to sub-clause (d) of that clausebe given before the Constituent Assembly for the purposeof framing the Constitution  of the State is convened, it

shall be placed before such Assembly for such decisionas it may take thereon.(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this article, the President may, by public
notification, declare that this article shall cease to be
operative or shall be operative only with such exceptionsand modifications and from such date as  he may specify:Provided that the recommendation of the ConstituentAssembly of the State referred to in clause (2) shall be
necessary before the President issues such a notification.2[371. 3*                *                 *                              *
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,the President may by order made with respect to 
5[the1See the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C.O. 48) as
amended from time to time, in Appendix I.2Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 22, for art. 371.3Cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, (w.e.f.
1-7-1974).4The words ﬁAndhra Pradesh,ﬂ omitted by s. 2, 
ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
5Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for ﬁthe State of
Bombayﬂ (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 370-371.)244Special provisionwith  respect to

the States of 4***Maharashtra and
Gujarat. 


 State of Maharashtra or Gujarat], provide for any specialresponsibility of the Governor forŠ(a) the establishment of separate developmentboards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, 
1[and the rest of
Maharashtra or, as the case may be,] Saurashtra,

Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that
a report on the working of  each of these boards will

be placed each year before the State LegislativeAssembly;(b) the equitable allocation of funds fordevelopmental expenditure over the said areas,
subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
and(c) an equitable arrangement providing  adequate
facilities for technical education and vocational
training, and adequate opportunities for employmentin services under the control of the State Government,in respect of all the said areas, subject to the
requirements of the State as a whole.]2[371A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) no Act of Parliament in respect ofŠ(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas,(ii) Naga customary law and procedure,(iii) administration of civil and criminal justiceinvolving decisions according to Naga customary
law,
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and itsresources,shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the LegislativeAssembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides;(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special
responsibility with respect to law and order in the
Special provisionwith respect to the
State of Nagaland.1Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for ﬁthe rest of
Maharashtra,ﬂ (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 371-371A.)245 


 State of Nagaland for so long as in his opinion internal
disturbances occurring in the Naga Hills-Tuensang
Area immediately before the formation of that State
continue therein  or in any part thereof and in the

discharge of his functions in relation thereto the
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of
Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the
action to be taken:Provided that if any question  arises whether any
matter is or is not a matter as respects which the

Governor is under  this sub-clause required to act in

the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision
of the Governor in  his discretion shall be  final, and

the validity of anything done by the Governor shall
not be called in question on the ground that he ought
or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his
individual judgment:Provided further that if the President on receipt  ofa report from the Governor or otherwise is satisfied
that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to
have special responsibility with respect to law and
order in the State of Nagaland, he may by order
direct that the Governor shall cease to have such
responsibility with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order;(c) in making his recommendation with respect toany demand for a grant, the Governor of Nagaland
shall ensure that any money provided by the
Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of
India for any specific service or purpose is included
in the demand for a grant relating to that service or
purpose and not in any other demand;(d) as from such date as the Governor ofNagaland may by public notification in this behalf

specify, there shall be established a regional council

for the Tuensang district consisting  of thirty-five

members and the Governor shall in his discretion
make rules providing forŠ(i) the composition of the regional council andthe manner in which the members of the regionalcouncil shall be chosen:THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371A.)246 


 Provided  that the Deputy Commissioner of the
Tuensang district  shall be the Chairman 
ex officioof the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of
the regional council shall be elected by the

members thereof from amongst themselves;(ii) the qualifications  for  being chosen as, and
for being, members of the regional council;(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries andallowances, if any, to be paid to members of, the

regional council;(iv) the  procedure and conduct of business of
the regional council;
(v) the appointment  of officers and staff of the
regional council and their conditions of services;and(vi) any other matter in respect of which it isnecessary to make rules for the constitution and
proper functioning of the regional council.(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,for a period of ten years from the date of the formation
of the State of Nagaland or for such further period
as the Governor may, on the recommendation of the

regional council, by public notification specify in thisbehalf,Š(a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall
be carried on by the Governor;(b) where any money is provided by theGovernment of India to the Government of Nagaland
to meet the requirements of the State of Nagaland
as a whole, the Governor shall in his discretion
arrange for an equitable allocation of that money
between the Tuensang district and the rest of the
State;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371A.)247 


 (c) no Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall
apply to Tuensang district unless the Governor, on
the recommendation of the regional council, by publicnotification so directs and the Governor in giving
such direction with respect to any such Act may
direct that the Act shall in its application to the
Tuensang district or any part thereof have effect

subject to such exceptions or modifications as theGovernor may specify on the recommendation of the
regional council:Provided that any direction given under thissub-clause may be given so as to have retrospective
effect;(d) the Governor may make regulations for thepeace, progress and good Government of the
Tuensang district and any regulations so made may
repeal or amend with retrospective effect, if necessary,
any Act of Parliament or any other law which is for
the time being applicable to that district;(e) (i) one of the members representing theTuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of

Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang

affairs by the Governor on the advice of the ChiefMinister and the Chief Minister in tendering his
advice shall act on the recommendation of the
majority of the members as aforesaid1;(ii) the Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal
with, and have direct access to the Governor on,
all matters relating to the Tuensang district but he

shall keep the Chief Minister informed about thesame;1Paragraph 2 of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. X provides (w.e.f.
1-12-1963) that article 371A of the Constitution of India Shall have effect as if the following
Proviso were added to paragraph (i) of sub-clause (e) of clause (2) thereof, namely:ŠﬁProvided that the Governor may, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint any
person as Minister for Tuensang affairs to act as such until such time as persons are

chosen in accordance with law to fill the seats allocated to the Tuensang district in the

Legislative Assembly of Nagaland.ﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371A.)248 


 (f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoingprovisions of this clause, the final decision on all
matters relating to the Tuensang district shall be

made by the Governor in his discretion;(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article80, references to the elected members of the Legislative
Assembly of a State or to each such member shall
include references to the members or member of the
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the
regional council established under this article;(h) in article 170Š(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the LegislativeAssembly of Nagaland, have effect as if for the
word ﬁsixtyﬂ, the word ﬁforty-sixﬂ had been
substituted;(ii) in the said clause, the reference to directelection from territorial constituencies in the State
shall include election by the members of the
regional council established under this article;(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references toterritorial constituencies shall mean references to
territorial constituencies in the Kohima and
Mokokchung districts.(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any ofthe foregoing provisions of this article, the President may
by order do anything (including any adaptation or
modification of any other article) which appears to him
to be necessary for the purpose of removing that
difficulty:Provided that no such order shall be made after theexpiration of three years from the date of the formation
of the State of Nagaland.Explanation.ŠIn this article, the Kohima,Mokokchung and Tuensang districts shall have the same

meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.]THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371A.)249 


 1[371B. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the President may, by order made with

respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitutionand functions of a committee of the Legislative Assemblyof the State consisting of members of that Assembly
elected from the tribal areas specified in 2[Part I] of thetable appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule
and such number of other members of that Assembly as
may be specified in the order and for the modificationsto be made in the rules of procedure of that Assemblyfor the constitution and proper functioning of such
committee.]3[371C. (1) Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, the President may, by order made with

respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the

constitution and functions of a committee of the
Legislative Assembly of the State  consisting of members

of that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State,for the modifications to be made in the rules of businessof the Government and in the rules of procedure of the
Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special
responsibility of the Governor in order to secure the
proper functioning of such committee.(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so
required by the President, make a report to the President
regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in theState of Manipur and the executive power of the Unionshall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to

the administration of the said areas.Explanation.ŠIn this article, the expression ﬁHillAreasﬂ means such areas as the President may, by order,

declare to be Hill areas.]
Special provisionwith respect to
the State of
Assam.Special provisionwith respect to
the State of
Manipur.
1Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4.
2Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971),  s. 71, for
ﬁPart Aﬂ (w
.e.f. 21-1-1972).3Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f.
15-2-1972).THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 371B-371C.)250 


 Special provisionswith respect to the
State of Andhra
Pradesh.1[371D. (1) The President may by order made with
respect  to the State of Andhra Pradesh provide, having
regard to the requirements of the State as a whole, for
equitable opportunities and facilities for the people
belonging to different parts of the State, in the matter
of public employment and in the matter of education, anddifferent provisions may be made for various parts of theState.(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in
particular,Š
(a) require the State Government to organise anyclass or classes of posts in a civil service of, or any
class or classes of civil posts under, the State  into

different local cadres for different parts of the Stateand allot in accordance with such principles andprocedure as may be specified in the order the
persons holding such posts to the local cadres so
organised;(b) specify any part or parts of the State whichshall be regarded as the local areaŠ(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any localcadre (whether organised in pursuance of an orderunder this article or constituted otherwise) underthe State Government;(ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadreunder any local authority within the State; and(iii) for the purposes of admission to anyUniversity within the State or to any other
educational institution which is subject to the
control of the State Government;(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in whichand the conditions subject to which, preference orreservation shall be given or madeŠ(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts inany such cadre referred to in sub-clause (b) as maybe specified in this behalf in the order;
1 Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371D.)251 


 (ii) in the matter of admission to any such
University or other educational institution referredto in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in thisbehalf in the order,
to or in favour of candidates who have resided or studiedfor any period specified in the order in the local area in
respect of such cadre, University or other educational
institution, as the case may be.(3) The President may, by order, provide for the
constitution of an Administrative Tribunal for the State of

Andhra Pradesh to exercise such jurisdiction, powersand authority [including any jurisdiction, power andauthority which immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973,
was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme
Court) or by any tribunal or other authority] as may be
specified in the order with respect to the following matters,namely:Š(a) appointment, allotment or promotion to suchclass or classes of posts in any civil service of theState, or to such class or classes of civil posts underthe State, or to such class or classes of posts under
the control of any local authority within the State, as
may be specified in the order;(b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted orpromoted to such class or classes of posts in any
civil service of the State, or to such class or classes
of civil posts under the State, or to such class or
classes of posts under the control of any localauthority within the State, as may be specified in theorder;(c) such other conditions of service of personsappointed, allotted or promoted to such class orclasses of posts in any civil service of the State or to
such class or classes of civil posts under the State or
to such class or classes of posts under the control of
any local authority within the State, as may bespecified in the order.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371D.)252 


 (4) An order made under clause (3) mayŠ(a) authorise the Administrative Tribunal to
receive representations for the redress of grievances
relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the
President may specify in the order and to make such
orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems

fit;(b) contain such provisions with respect to thepowers and authorities and procedure of the
Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with

respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal

to punish for contempt of itself) as the President
may deem necessary;(c) provide for the transfer to the AdministrativeTribunal of such classes of proceedings, being

proceedings relating to matters within its jurisdiction
and pending before any court (other than the
Supreme Court) or tribunal or other authority
immediately before the commencement of such order,

as may be specified in the order;(d) contain such supplemental, incidental andconsequential provisions (including provisions as to
fees and as to limitation, evidence or for the
application of any law for the time being in force
subject to any exceptions or modifications) as the
President may deem necessary.
1(5) The Order of 
the Administrative Tribunal finally
disposing of any case shall become effective upon its
confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry of
three months from the date on which the order is made,
whichever is earlier:Provided that the State Government may, by special
order made in writing and for reasons to be specified1In P. Sambamurthy and others 
vs. State of Andhara Pradesh and another (1987) 1 SCC,p. 362, the Supreme Court declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to be
unconstitutional  and void.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371D.)253 


 therein, modify or annul any order of the Administrative
Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case,
the order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect

only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be.(6) Every special order made by the State Governmentunder the proviso to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before both Houses of the State
Legislature.(7) The High Court for the State shall not have anypowers of superintendence over the Administrative
Tribunal and no court (other than the Supreme Court) or

tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority
in respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power
or authority of, or in relation to, the Administrative
Tribunal.
(8) If the President is satisfied that the continuedexistence of the Administrative T
ribunal is not necessary,
the President may by order abolish the Administrative
Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he

may deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases
pending before the Tribunal immediately before such

abolition.(9) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or orderof any court, tribunal or other authority,Š
(a) no appointment, posting, promotion or transferof any personŠ(i) made before the 1st day of November, 1956,
to any post under the Government of, or any local

authority within, the State of Hyderabad as it
existed before that date; or
(ii) made before the commencement of theConstitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act,
1973, to any post under the Government of, or
any local or other authority within, the State of
Andhra Pradesh; andTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 371D.)254 


 (b) no action taken or thing done by or before any
person referred to in sub-clause (a),shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever to havebecome illegal or void merely on the ground that the
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of suchperson was not made in accordance with any law, then
in force, providing for any requirement as to residence
within the State of Hyderabad or, as the case may be,

within any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh, in respect
of such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer.
 (10) The provisions of this article and of any order
made by the President thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being inforce.371E. Parliament may by law provide for theestablishment of a University in the State of AndhraPradesh.]1[371F. 
Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkimshall consist of not less than thirty members;(b) as from the date of commencement of theConstitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975
(hereafter in this article referred to as the appointed
day)Š(i) the Assembly for Sikkim formed as a resultof the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with
thirty-two members elected in the said elections(hereinafter referred to as the sitting members)shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Sikkim duly constituted under this
Constitution;Establishment of
Central University
in Andhra Pradesh.Special provisionswith respect to the
State of Sikkim.1Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975,  s. 3 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions
.ŠArts. 371DŠ371F.)255 


 (ii) the sitting members shall be deemed to bethe members of the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Sikkim duly elected under this

Constitution; and(iii) the said Legislative Assembly of the Stateof Sikkim shall exercise the powers and perform
the functions of the Legislative Assembly of a State
under this Constitution;(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be theLegislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under
clause (b), the references to the period of 1[five years],in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as
references to a period of 2[four years] and the saidperiod of 2[four years] shall be deemed to commencefrom the appointed day;(d) until other provisions are made by Parliamentby law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim

one seat in the House of the People and the State of
Sikkim shall form one parliamentary constituency
to be called the parliamentary constituency for
Sikkim;(e) the representative of the State of Sikkim in theHouse of the People in existence on the appointed
day shall be elected by the members of the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Sikkim;(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting
the rights and interests of the different sections of
the population of Sikkim make provision for the
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates
belonging to such sections and for the delimitation
of the assembly constituencies from which candidates1Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for ﬁsix yearsﬂ(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words ﬁsix yearsﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁfive yearsﬂ by the

Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for ﬁfive yearsﬂ(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words ﬁfive yearsﬂ were subs. for the original words ﬁfour yearsﬂ by

the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions
.ŠArt. 371F.)256 


 belonging to such sections alone may stand for
election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Sikkim;(g) the Governor of Sikkim shall have specialresponsibility for peace and for an equitable
arrangement for ensuring the social and economicadvancement of different sections of the populationof Sikkim and in the discharge of his special
responsibility under this clause, the Governor ofSikkim shall, subject to such directions as thePresident may, from time to time, deem fit to issue,

act in his discretion;(h) all property and assets (whether within oroutside the territories comprised in the State ofSikkim) which immediately before the appointed daywere vested in the Government of Sikkim or in any
other authority or in any person for the purposes ofthe Government of Sikkim shall, as from the appointedday, vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim;
(i) the High Court functioning as suchimmediately before the appointed day in theterritories comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, onand from the appointed day, be deemed to be the

High Court for the State of Sikkim;(j) all courts of civil, criminal and revenuejurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial,
executive and ministerial, throughout the territory
of the State of Sikkim shall continue on and from theappointed day to exercise their respective functionssubject to the provisions of this Constitution;(k) all laws in force immediately before theappointed day in the territories comprised in the
State of Sikkim or any part thereof shall continue
to be in force therein until amended or repealed bya competent Legislature or other competent
authority;THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions
.ŠArt. 371F.)257 


 (l) for the purpose of facilitating the applicationof any such law as is referred to in clause (k) inrelation to the administration of the State of Sikkim
and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of
any such law into accord with the provisions of this
Constitution, the President may, within two years

from the appointed day, by order, make such

adaptations and modifications of the law, whether

by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary
or expedient, and thereupon, every such law shall

have effect subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made, and any such adaptation or
modification shall not be questioned in any court of
law;(m) neither the Supreme Court nor any other courtshall have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or
other matter arising out of any treaty, agreement,

engagement or other similar instrument relating to
Sikkim which was entered into or executed before
the appointed day and to which the Government of
India or any of its predecessor Governments was a
party, but nothing in this clause shall be construed

to derogate from the provisions of article 143;(n) the President may, by public notification, extend
with such restrictions or modifications as he
thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which

is in force in a State in India at the date of the
notification;(o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any ofthe foregoing provisions of this article, the President
may, by order
1, do anything (including anyadaptation or modification of any other article) which
appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of
removing that difficulty:Provided that no such order shall be made afterthe expiry of two years from the appointed day;1See the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. XI (C.O. 99).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions
.ŠArt. 371F.)258 


 (p) all things done and all actions taken in or in
relation to the State of Sikkim or the territoriescomprised therein during the period commencing
on the appointed day and ending immediately before
the date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1975, receives the assent of the
President shall, in so far as they are in conformitywith the provisions of this Constitution as amendedby the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act,
1975, be deemed for all purposes to have been validly
done or taken under this Constitution as so
amended.]1[371G. Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) no Act of Parliament in respect ofŠ(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos,(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure,(iii) administration of civil and criminal justiceinvolving decisions according to Mizo customary
law,
(iv) ownership and transfer of land,shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless theLegislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram by aresolution so decides:Provided that nothing in this clause shall applyto any Central Act in force in the Union territory of
Mizoram immediately before the commencement of
the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986;(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State ofMizoram shall consist of not less than fortymembers.]2[371H. Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution,Š(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall havespecial responsibility with respect to law and order
Special provisionwith respect to the
State of Mizoram.Special provisionwith respect to the
State of Arunachal
Pradesh.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
2Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 371FŠ371H.)259 


 in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and in the discharge
of his functions in relation thereto, the Governor shall,after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise hisindividual judgment as to the action to be taken:Provided that if any question arises whether any
matter is or is not a matter as respects which the
Governor is under this clause required to act in the
exercise of his individual judgment, the decision ofthe Governor in his discretion shall be final, and thevalidity of anything done by the Governor shall not
be called in question on the ground that he ought orought not to have acted in the exercise of hisindividual judgment:Provided further that if the President on receiptof a report from the Governor or otherwise is satisfiedthat it is no longer necessary for the Governor to
have special responsibility with respect to law andorder in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may byorder direct that the Governor shall cease to have
such responsibility with effect from such date as maybe specified in the order;(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State ofArunachal Pradesh shall consist of not less thanthirty members.]1[371-I. Notwithstanding anything in thisConstitution, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goashall consist of not less than thirty members.]372. (1) Notwithstanding the repeal by thisConstitution of the enactments referred to in article 395but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, allthe law in force in the territory of India immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shallcontinue in force therein until altered or repealed oramended by a competent Legislature or other competent
authority.
(2) For the purpose of brining the provisions of anylaw in force in the territory of India into accord with theSpecial provisionwith respect to the
State of Goa.Continuance inforce of existing
laws and their
adaptation.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 371HŠ372.)260 


 provisions of this Constitution, the President may by
order1 make such adaptations and modifications of such
law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be

necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as
from such date as may be specified in the order, have

effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so
made, and any such adaptation or modification shall notbe questioned in any court of law.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemedŠ(a) to empower the President to make any
adaptation or modification of any law after theexpiration of 2[three years] from the commencementof this Constitution; or(b) to prevent any competent Legislature or othercompetent authority from repealing or amending any
law adapted or modified by the President under the
said clause.Explanation I.ŠThe expression ﬁlaw in forceﬂ in thisarticle shall include a law passed or made by a Legislature
or other competent authority in the territory of India before
the commencement of this Constitution and not previouslyrepealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not bethen in operation either at all or in particular areas.Explanation II.ŠAny law passed or made by aLegislature or other competent authority in the territory
of India which immediately before the commencement ofthis Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well aseffect in the territory of India shall, subject to any such
adaptations and modifications as aforesaid, contiue tohave such extra-territorial effect.1See the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, p. 449, as amended by Notification No. S.R.O. 115, dated the 5th June,

1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 51, Notification No. S.R.O. 870,

dated the 4th November
, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 903,
Notification No. S.R.O. 508, dated the 4th April, 1951, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part

II, Section 3, p. 287, Notification No. S.R.O. 1140B, dated 2nd July, 1952, Gazette of India,

Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 616/I; 
and the Adaptation of 
the Travancore-Cochin
Land Acquisition Laws Order, 1952, dated the 20th November, 1952, Gazette of India,

Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 923.
2Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 12, for ﬁtwo yearsﬂ.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 372.)261 


 Explanation III
.ŠNothing in this article shall beconstrued as continuing any temporary law in forcebeyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date on
which it would have expired if this Constitution had  not

come into force.Explanation IV.
ŠAn Ordinance promulgated by the
Governor of a Province under section 88 of the
Government of India Act, 1935, and in force immediatelybefore the commencement of this Constitution shall, unlesswithdrawn by the Governor of the corresponding State
earlier, cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks

from the first meeting after such commencement of the
Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under
clause (1) of article 382, and  nothing in this article shall
be construed as continuing any such Ordinance in forcebeyond the said period.1[372A. (1) For the purposes of bringing the provisionsof any law in force in India or in any part thereof,
immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accordwith the provisions of this Constitution as amended bythat Act, the President may by order2 made before the
first day of November, 1957, make such adaptations and

modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or

amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may bespecified in the order, have effect subject to the
adaptations and modifications so made, and any such
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in
any court of law.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to preventa competent Legislature or other competent authorityfrom repealing or amending any law adapted or modifiedby the President under the said clause.]373. Until provision is made by Parliament underclause (7) of article 22, or until the expiration of one year
from the commencement of this Constitution, whichever
is earlier, the said  article shall have effect as if for any
reference to Parliament in clauses (4) and (7) thereof there
Power of thePresident toadapt laws.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 23.2See the Adaptation of Laws Orders of 1956 and 1957.
Power of Presidentto make order in
respect of persons
under preventive
detention in certain
cases.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 372Š373.)262 


 were substituted a reference to the President and for any
reference to any law made by Parliament in those clausesthere were substituted a reference to an order made by
the President.374. (1) The Judges of the Federal Court holding officeimmediately before the commencement of thisConstitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Judges of the
Supreme Court and shall thereupon be entitled to such
salaries and allowances and to such rights in respect
of leave of absence and pension as are provided forunder article 125 in respect of the Judges of the SupremeCourt.(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil orcriminal, pending in the Federal Court at the
commencement of this Constitution shall stand removed
to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall havejurisdiction to hear and determine the same, and thejudgments and  orders of the Federal Court delivered or

made before the  commencement of this Constitution shall
have the same force and effect as if they had been
delivered or made by the Supreme Court.(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate toinvalidate the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty inCouncil to dispose of appeals and petitions from, or in
respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court
within the territory of India in so far as the exercise of
such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and any order of

His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal orpetition after the commencement of this Constitutionshall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order
or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of
the jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this
Constitution.(4) On and from the commencement of thisConstitution the jurisdiction of the authority functioningas the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the
Provisions as toJudges of the
Federal Court and
proceedings
pending in the
Federal Court or
before His Majesty
in Council.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 373-374.)263 


 First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals andpetitions from or in respect of any judgment, decree or
order of any court within that State shall cease, and all
appeals and other proceedings pending before the said
authority at such commencement shall be transferred to,
and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament bylaw to give effect to the provisions of this article.375. All courts of civil, criminal and revenuejurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial,
executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of
India, shall continue to exercise their respective functions
subject to the provisions of this Constitution.376. (1) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2) ofarticle 217, the Judges of a High Court in any Province
holding office immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Judges of the High

Court in the corresponding State, and shall thereupon be
entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such
rights in  respect of leave of absence and pension as are

provided for under article 221 in respect of the Judges of
such High Court. 1[Any such Judge shall, notwithstandingthat he is not a citizen of India, be eligible for appointment
as Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or
other Judge of any other High Court.](2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian Statecorresponding to any State specified in Part B of the First
Schedule holding office immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement
the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified

and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses  (1) and

(2) of article 217 but subject to the proviso to clause (1)
of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration
of such period as the President may by order determine.
Courts, authorities
and officers to
continue to
function subject to
the provisions of
the Constitution.Provisions as toJudges of High
Courts.1Added by the by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 13.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArts. 374Š376.)264 


 (3)  In this article, the expression ﬁJudgeﬂ does not
include an acting Judge or an additional Judge.377. The Auditor-General of India holding officeimmediately before the commencement of thisConstitution shall, unless he has elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Comptroller andAuditor-General of India and shall thereupon be entitledto such salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of
absence and pension as are provided for underclause (3) of article 148 in respect of the Comptroller andAuditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to
hold office until the expiration of his term of office asdetermined under the provisions which were applicableto him immediately before such commencement.378. (1) The members of the Public ServiceCommission for the Dominion of India holding officeimmediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,become on such commencement the members of thePublic Service Commission for the Union and shall,
notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) ofarticle 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of thatarticle, continue to hold office until the expiration of
their term of office as determined under the rules which
were applicable immediately before such commencementto such members.(2) The members of a Public Service Commission of aProvince or of a Public Service Commission serving the
needs of a group of Provinces holding office immediatelybefore the commencement of this Constitution shall, unlessthey have elected otherwise, become on such
commencement the members of the Public ServiceCommission for the corresponding State or the membersof the Joint State Public Service Commission  serving the

needs of the corresponding States, as the case may be,and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and
(2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2)
of that article, continue to hold office until the expirationof their term of office as determined under the rules whichwere applicable immediately before such commencementto such members.Provisions as toComptroller and
Auditor-General
of India.Provisions as toPublic Service
Commissions.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 376Š378.)265 


 1[378A. Notwithstanding anything contained in article172, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra
Pradesh as constituted under the provisions of sections
28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall,
unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five
years from the date referred to in the said section 29 and
no longer and the expiration of the said period shall
operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.]
379.Š391. Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)Act, 1956, s. 
29 and Sch.392. (1) The President may, for the purpose of removing
any difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition
from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935,
to the provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that
this Constitution shall, during such period as may be
specified in the order, have effect subject to such

adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or
omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient:Provided that no such order shall be made after thefirst meeting of Parliament duly constituted under Chapter
II of Part V.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall be laidbefore Parliament.(3) The powers conferred on the President by thisarticle, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by
article 391 shall, before the commencement of this

Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of
the Dominion of India.Special provision
as to duration of
Andhra Pradesh
Legislative
Assembly.
Power of thePresident to
remove difficulties.1Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 24.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXI.ŠTemporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.ŠArt. 378AŠ392.)266 


 PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT 
1[, AUTHORI-TATIVE TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS
393. This Constitution may be called the Constitutionof India.394.  This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60,  324, 366,
367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 shall come into force
at once, and the remaining provisions of this Constitution
shall come into force on the twenty-sixth day of January,

1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution as the
commencement of this Constitution.2[394A. (1) The President shall cause to be publishedunder his authority,Š
(a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindilanguage, signed by the members of the Constituent
Assembly, with such modifications as may be

necessary to bring it in conformity with the language,
style and terminology adopted in the authoritative
texts of Central Acts in the Hindi language, and
incorporating therein all the amendments of this
Constitution made before such publication; and(b) the translation in the Hindi language of everyamendment of this Constitution made in the English
language.(2) The translation of this Constitution and of everyamendment thereof published under clause (1) shall be
construed to have the same meaning as  the original

thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing any
part of such translation, the President shall cause the
same to be revised suitably.
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of everyamendment thereof published under this article shall  be
267Short title.Commencement.Authoritative textin the Hindi

language.1Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987,  s. 2.
2Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 


 deemed to be, for all purposes, the authoritative textthereof in the Hindi language.]395. The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and theGovernment of India Act, 1935, together with all
enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act,

but not including the Abolition of Privy Council
Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.Repeals.THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA(Part XXII.ŠShort Title, Commencement, Authoritative
Text in Hindi and Repeals.ŠArts. 394A
-395.)268


  


 PREFACE
Constitution is a living document, an instrument which makes thegovernment system work. Its flexibility lies in its amendments. In this edition,
the text of the Constitution of India has been brought up-to-date by
incorporating therein all amendments made by Parliament up to and including
the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006. The footnotes below
the text indicate the Constitution Amendment Acts by which such amendments
have been made.The Constitution applies to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with certainexceptions and modifications as provided in article 370 and the Constitution
(Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954. This Order has been

included in Appendix I for facility of reference. Appendix II contains a
re-statement of the exceptions and modifications.The text of the constitutional amendments relating to the Constitution(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, the Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2002 and the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act,
2003, which have not yet come into force, have been provided in the text at
the appropriate places wherever or otherwise in the footnote.NEW DELHI;DR. K.N. CHATURVEDI,
1st December 
2007.Secretary to the Government of India